180 H6js
Hicks
Stoic and Epicurean
61-10001
180 H63s
Hicks
Stoic and Epicurean
61-10001
-J8Y-
DATE DUE
THE EPOCHS OF PHILOSOPHY
Edited by JOHN GRIER HIBBEN, Princeton University
The aim of the series on The Epochs of Philosophy^
is to
present the significant features of philosophical thought in the
chief periods of its development. There is no attempt to give
a complete account in every case of the men or their works
which these various periods have produced; but rather to esti-
mate and interpret the characteristic contributions which each
age may have made to the permanent store of philosophical
knowledge. Such a process of interpretation, therefore, must
be necessarily selective. And in the light of the specific^ pur-
poses of this series the principle of selection suggests itself,
namely, to emphasise especially those doctrines which have
appeared as effective factors in the evolution of philosophical
thought as a whole. Moreover, these various periods are inti-
mately connected; the history is a continuous one. While
there are several distinct epochs of philosophy, there is but
one movement of philosophical thought, and it is hoped that
the present series will serve, in some slight measure at^ least, to
deepen the impression of that fundamental unity which char-
acterises the progress of philosophy through the many phases
of its development.
VOLUMES AND AUTHORS
THE BEGINNINGS OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY
By F, J. E. WOQDBJUDGB, Professor in Columbia University.
THE PLATONIC PHILOSOPHY
By A. E* TAYLOR, Professor of Moral Philosophy, St. Andrews
University.
THE ARISTOTELIAN PHILOSOPHY
By PAXT& SKORBY, Professor of Greek, University of Chicago.
THE EPOCHS OF PHILOSOPHY
STOIC AND EPICUREAN
By R. D. HICKS, Fellow and late Lecturer, Trinity College,
Cambridge. (Now ready.)
NEO-PLATONISM AND CHRISTIANITY
By F. W. BUSSELL, Vice-Principal of Brasenose College, Oxford.
THE MEDIAEVAL PHILOSOPHY
(Author to be announced later.)
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE RENAISSANCE
By CHARLES M. BAKEWELL, Professor of Philosophy, Yale Uni-
versity.
THE RISE OFTHE HISTORICALMETHOD IN PHILOSOPHY
By J. E. CREIGHTON, Professor of Logic and Metaphysics, Cornell
University.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF RATIONALISM
By FRANKTHUXY, Professor of Ethics, Cornell University.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE ENLIGHTENMENT
By JOHN GRIER HIBBEN, Professor of Logic, Princeton Uni-
versity. (Now ready.)
THE CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY
By JOSIAH ROYCE, Professor of the History of Philosophy, Harvard
University.
THE IDEALISTIC MOVEMENT OF THOUGHT IN THENINETEENTH CENTURY
By J. B. BAIIXIE, Professor of Moral Philosophy, Aberdeen Uni-
versity.
An additional volume (title to be announced later) Is ex-
pected from A. S. PRINGLE-PATTISON, Professor of Logic and
Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh.
STOIC AND EPICUREAN
'AXV, <S 0Xe, ty 5' iy6, \iArpov ruv roiofotav &iro\eiirov
&TIOVV TOV 6vro$ oft ir&vv peTpiw ylyvfrac dreX^s 7^p oti
s /jrpov, ^PLATO, Republic, VI, 504, C.
EPOCHS OF PHILOSOPHY
STOIC AND EPICUREAN
BY
R. D. .HICKS, M.A.
FELLOW AND FORMERLY LECTURER OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE
NEW YORK
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
1910
Copyright, 1910, by
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
Published February, 1910
PREFACE
THE philosophical systems of Zeno and Epicurus
may profitably be studied together. For, in spite of
obvious differences, over which their adherents for
centuries waged internecine warfare, it is easy to
discern the fundamental similarity between them.
Both schools sought by devious paths one and the
same goal. Both exalted practice above theory, and
conceded to sense and experience their full right.
Both, in short, were crude forms of realism, which
for the time (and not for that time alone) had come
into its inheritance and held full sway over the minds
of men. The temper of the age favoured such a
reaction from extreme intellectualism. The success
of the new schools, if not immediate, was assured
from the first, reaching its height when Hellenistic
culture was taken up by the practical Romans. My
exposition of these two parallel systems of thought
is primarily based on independent study of the orig-
inal authorities. In this department of the history
of philosophy much good work has been done in the
last quarter of a century. I have made it my busi-
ness to compare the results of recent investigation
with the sources themselves, now rendered accessible,
as they never have been before, through the labours
of such competent scholars as Diels, Wachsmuth,
Usener, and von Arnim. Even with these welcome
aids, the task of research is by no means easy, owing
to the scantiness and the peculiar nature ofthe mate-
rials which time has spared. To take the early
0001
vi PREFACE
Stoics, Zeno and Chrysippus; much of the evidence
is derived from opponents who were naturally more
alert to detect and expose inconsistencies than care-
ful to state impartially the doctrines they impugned.
When amplermeans ofinformation become available,
new difficulties arise; for while it is certain that the
Stoics of Cicero's time had diverged from the stand-
ards of orthodoxy prescribed by their predecessors,
it is not equally certain wherein precisely this diver-
gence consisted. Thus Cicero puts into the mouth
of Cato a lucid exposition of Stoic ethics, but what
particular Stoic was Cicero's authority, and how far
this authority reproduced or modified the original
doctrine of Zeno and Chrysippus, is matter of dis-
pute. Nor are these difficulties removed by con-
sulting Seneca, Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius, the
authors whom we know at first hand and in fullest
detail. It is difficult to see how, from a mass of
precepts, exhortations and moral reflections the un-
derlying structure of dogma can be inferred with
such clearness and precision as readily to serve for
comparison with other authorities. The most care-
ful inquiry must, therefore, leave room for doubt, on
questions of grave importance. In the first three
chapters of this work the reader will find a nucleus
of fact, well attested by documentary evidence, and
my constant endeavour has been to bring him, wher-
ever possible, face to face with the utterances of the
Stoics themselves, so that he may judge for himself
of the correctness ofmy interpretation.
In the fourth chapter I have followed substan-
tially the same course, availing myself of the excel-
lent versions of Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius by
Long and Rendall. Seneca, on the other hand,
though still popular in France, has with us of late
PREFACE vii
fallen into neglect. Even of his epistles we have
no standard translation, a fact which well deserves
the attention of English and American scholars.
The rival school of Epicurus has been more for-
tunate. Not only have we the summaries of its
founder, but the task of reconstruction is rendered
comparatively easy by the poem ofLucretius, which
the English reader can study for himself in the ad-
mirable prose version of H. A. J. Munro. Here,
while reserving the right to form my own judgment
from the evidence, I have, in the main, followed the
guidance of Munro and Giussani. Some points of
detail are obscure, but on the whole no ancient sys-
tem is more easily comprehended or appraised. In
my sixth chapter I have tried to render adequately
one valuable Epicurean document, the letter to
Herodotus, and occasional illustrations and parallels
have been added to make its meaning clearer. In
dealing with Epicurean theology in the seventh
chapter, we quit the region of ascertained fact for
dubious speculation and ingenious conjecture. Cau-
tion is therefore necessary, since the promised ex-
ploration of Herculaneum may some day bring to
light the missing clue to this puzzling riddle.
Not the least noteworthy feature in these two
philosophies is the long duration of their exclusive,
if divided, supremacy. In the school of Epicurus
there are no changes to record. Everything goes to
show that the doctrine of the founder was guarded
intact as he had left it. Even the genius of Lucre-
tius did but enshrine it in an imperishable memorial.
It was far otherwise with Stoicism, which provoked
fierce opposition and was continually modified by
pressure from without and within. No narrative of
its rise and development would be complete which
viii PREFACE
failed to take account of these conflicts. It has,
therefore, been incumbent upon me to linger awhile
over the adversaries and critics of the Stoics, to
describe the successive phases of Academic Scepti-
cism and Eclecticism, and above all, to emphasise
the influence of Carneades. In this way the eighth
and ninth chapters may be regarded as forming an
integral portion of my plan. For the last chapter
a similar excuse may be tendered. After permitting
the other opponents of the Stoics to state their objec-
tions it would have been inconsistent to pass over
.ZEnesidemus and not to allow Sextus Empiricus and
the Pyrrhoneans to say the last word. For the use
of students a select bibliography has been appended,
as well as a chronological table of the more note-
worthy thinkers and writers. A historical sketch
ranging over five centuries stands in need of some
such aid, if it be no more than the merest framework
of names and dates.
The proprietors of the Encyclopaedia Britannica
have courteously granted me permission to use for
my present purpose the article on Stoics, which I
contributed to the Encyclopaedia some twenty years
ago. I gratefully acknowledge my obligations to
Mrs. Adam for allowingme to include in this volume
a verse translation of the Hymn of Cleanthes, which
her husband, the late Dr. James Adam, had privately
printed. I am further indebted to Prof. H. N.
Gardiner for his kindness in reading through the
proofs and suggesting various improvements.
CONTENTS
PAGE
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE xv
CHAPTER I
THE EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM . .
3
Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, 4; Cynics and Stoics, 9; in-
fluence of Heraclitus, 10 ; Cleanthes'sHymn to Zeus, 14;
its religious fervour, 16; Stoic pantheism, whence de-
rived, 18; body the sole reality, 22; yet instinct with
energy, 24; cosmology: force and matter, how related,
26; universal intermingling of qualities, 28; cosmogony,
30; the cycle of finite existence perpetually repeated, 33;
natural theology, 39; moral order of the world, 41; the
existence of moral evil, 43; how regardedby Chrysippus,
44; and by Marcus Aurelius, 46.
CHAPTER II
STOIC PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY . .
54
The art of life at once practical and comprehensive, 54;
logic, 55; new table of categories, 56; Lekton, the mat-
ter or content of predication, 58; nature of the soul, 60;
its unity, 62; its diverse functions miscalled "parts," 63;
theory of knowledge: preconceptions and general no-
tions, 66; presentations to sense and the test of their
truth, 69; knowledge a system of presentations to sense
or to reason, 72.
CHAPTER III
MORAL IDEALISM 74
The six heads of scientific ethics, 75; (i and 2) the end of
action determined by the teleological view of the uni-
verse, 76; "Follow Nature," how interpreted, 77- how
ix
x CONTENTS
PAGE
individual man, non-moral at birth, develops into a
moral being, 80; instinctive impulse and rational choice,
81; fallacies in the argument considered, 82; (3) virtue
disinterested, 85; one and indivisible, 86; admits of no
degrees, 87; .,progress toward virtue, 88; (4) the con-
ception of relative value in our estimate of external
things, 90; the judgment of value converts them into
material for the exercise of virtue, 92; (5) the suitable
and consistent in the sphere of action, 93; the latent con-
ception of duty and obligation thence evolved, 94; the
suitable, how related to the right, 95; the circumstances
of the agent and his environment a determining factor,
97; application to suicide, 98; (6) feelings classified,
102; vicious emotions voluntary: rational beings free to
disobey reason, 104; originality of the Stoics, 105; their
definitions compared, 106; rational emotions, e.g., joy,
recognised, 107; other affections apparently interme-
diate, 108; physical pleasure, how regarded, no; its
condemnation, if it is a necessary concomitant, unjus-
tifiable, in.
CHAPTER IV
THE TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS . .
113
Stoicpropaganda, 113; the appeal of Epictetus, 114; need
of philosophic instruction, 116; the stages of progress or
probation, 118; probationers classified by Seneca, 120;
three stages in the course of instruction formulated by
Epictetus, 121; the third and most advanced stage
logical training, 123; duties to self, 125; personal dignity
and modesty, 128; independence and the dignity of
labour, 130; the essence of true piety, 132; polytheism,
how interpreted, 135; prayer and offerings, how de-
fended, 136; social duties rest on primary relationships,
137; defence of the family; female education, 138; civic
duties present a dilemma: cosmopolitanism in conflict
with restricted patriotism, 140; attitude to war and
slavery, 142; the duty of goodwill to all men and of
patieBfce under injuries, 145; yet pity and forgiveness
just as Inexcusable as resentment and envy, 146; legal
CONTENTS xi
. PAGE
penalties rigorously enforced, 148; morality culminates
in active benevolence and the disinterested service of our
fellowmen, 150.
CHAPTER V
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 153
Career of Epicurus, 153; his character, 159; epitomes of
his system, 161; his talent for organisation, 162; his
earnestness and contempt for accomplishments, 163;
happiness nominally identified with pleasure, 164; diver-
gencefromAristippusand the Cyrenaics, 165; happiness
negatively determined as freedom from pain, 166; influ-
ence of Democritus, 167; the letter to Menceceus, 168;
the individual and society, 174; sketch of the rise of
civilisation, 175; law and justice traced back to com-
pact, 177; civil government on the whole beneficial, 180;
but the compulsory ties of family and state inferior to
thevoluntaryassociation offriendship, 181 ; benevolence,
183; the golden maxims, 184j fragments from CEno-
anda, 189; other characteristic utterances, 190; con-
tempt forfame, 195; strictures on Greek statesmen, 196;
on Stoic virtue, 196; personality of Epicurus, 198;
modern parallels: Bentham, 198; Herbert Spencer, 199.
CHAPTER VI
THE ATOMIC THEORY 203
Ancient atomism, how related to modern scientific theories,
203; unpopular in Greece, 205; adoption by Epicurus,
207; his rejection of contemporary mathematics and
astronomy, 209; his canons or rules of evidence, 213;
veracity of sensation, 215; importance of clear and dis-
tinct preconceptions, 217; the letter to Herodotus: the
sum total of existence, bodies and empty space, is neither
increased nor diminished, but remains constant, 219;
bodies are either composite wholes or their indivisible
elements, the atoms, 220; infinity of atoms and of space,
221; shape and motion of atoms, 222; there are infinite
worlds* 228; theory of sense-perception and of emana-
xii CONTENTS
PAGE
tions from the surface of composite bodies, 229; seeing,
235; hearing and smelling, 238; unchangeable proper-
ties of atoms, 240; infinite divisibility of matter rejected,
243; discrete, perceptible minima, 246; discrete minima
of the atom, 248; relativity of upward and downward
motion, 253; velocity of atoms constant, 255 ; whyatoms
collide, 258; atomic declination as set forth by Lucretius,
261; nature of the soul, 264; the account of Lucretius
compared, 267; permanent properties and variable acci-
dents of composite things, 270; nature of time, 272;
origin of language, 275; celestial and meteorological
phenomena independent of divine agency, 276; rules to
be followed in the investigation of their causes, 277; how
the baneful effect of superstitious terrors and the fear of
death may be removed, 279.
CHAPTER VII
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 282
The gods of Epicurus not supernatural beings controlling
nature from outside, 282; influence of Democritus, 283;
modifications introduced by Epicurus, 286; grounds of
his belief in gods, 288; their attributes, 289; the problem
of their physical constitution, 291; Cicero's evidence,
how interpreted by Lachelier and Scott, 293; difficulties
in this interpretation, 296; attitude of Epicurus to the
popular religion, 298; his conception of worship, 301;
rejection of creation and Providence, 304; toleration of
freethinkers in antiquity, 306; occasional outbursts of
persecution, 307; the impostor Alexander of Abonu-
teichos, as described by Lucian, 308; Diogenes of (Eno-
anda, a zealous Epicurean: his last appeal cited, 309.
CHAPTER VIII
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY: CARNEADES . 312
Scepticism a term of various meanings, 312; Pyrrho of
Elis, 314; his disciple Timon, 315; the Old Academy
and the innovations of Arcesilas, 317; Carneades, the
adversaiy of the Stoics, 322; his negative amd destructive
CONTENTS xiii
PAGE
criticism, 323; of Stoic epistemology, 324; theology, 326;
and the doctrine of Providence, 334; his limitations as a
critic, 337; positive side of his teaching, 341 ; his calculus
of probability, 342; his defence of human freedom, 344;
his formal classification of ethical theories, 347; general
estimate of Carneades as a thinker, 351.
CHAPTER IX
ECLECTICISM 353
Tendency to a fusion of conflicting doctrines, 353; the
Academy under Philo of Larissa and Antiochus of Asca-
lon, 355; Cicero a typical Eclectic, 358; Plutarch of
Chaeronea, 360; modifications of Stoicism, 361; its
introduction to the Roman world, 363; Panaetius, 364;
Posidonius, 366; later phases of Roman Stoicism, 367.
CHAPTER X
^ENESIDEMUS AND THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHO-
NISM ............ 371
Sceptics in the medical profession, 371 ; writings of Sextus
Empiricus, 372; his merits and defects, 373; ^Enesi-
demus, 374; his probable date, 375; the ten tropes, 376;
the five tropes of Agrippa, 377; arguments of ^Enesi-
demus to show that no truth exists, 380; estimate of
their validity, 382; his arguments upon causality, 385;
eight tropes in refutation of this notion, 386; defects in
his assumptions, 388; his polemic against demonstrative
signs, 389; his acceptance of reminiscent signs: how re-
lated to a scientific theory of induction, 393; originality
of ^Enesidemus, 395; Heraditeanism attributed to him
by Sextus, 396 ; sceptical position of his successors un-
shaken, 397.
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY ,401
INDEX 405
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE
1
RISE OF THE NEW SCHOOLS
B.C.
341. Birth of Epicurus at Sa-
mos (Gamelion 7).
336/5. Birth of Zeno at Citium
[348/7 Unger, 356/5
Brinker.]
333/2. Birth of Cleanthes at
Assos.
330. Birth of Metrodorus at
Lampsacus.
323. Epicurus a student at
Athens.
322. Expulsion of Athenian set-
tlers from Samos. Epi-
curus joins his father at
Colophon.
314. Zeno at Athens studies un-
der the Cynics, Megari-
ans and Academics.
CONTEMPORARY EVENTS
B.C.
347- Death of Plato. With
Speusippus his successor
begins the Old Academy.
338. Chseronea. Macedonian
supremacy. Xenocrates
succeeds Speusippus.
335-323- Aristotle at Athens.
Foundation of the Peri-
patetic School in the Ly-
ceum.
334. Alexander sets out to con-
quer Asia. Pyrrho of
Elis follows his march as
far as India.
328. Crates of Thebes, a pupil
of Diogenes the Cynic.
323. Death of Alexander at
Babylon.
322. Death of Aristotle. Theo-
phrastus succeeds.
c. 320/16. Birth of Timon at
Phlius.
314. Death of Xenocrates. Po-
lemo succeeds.
1 The Roman civil year began, like our own, in January. The Attic
civil year began after the'summer solstice, say in July: hence the occa-
sional double dating. Moreover, a Greek Olympiad covers a space of
four years.
XVI CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE
RISE OP THE NEW SCHOOLS
B.C.
310. Epicurus teaches at Mity-
lene and Lampsacus.
307/6. Epicurus at Athens
opens his school in the
garden.
300/299. Epicurus completes
BookXV of his work On
Nature.
296/5. Epicuruscompletes
Eook XXVIII On Na-
ture.
c. 294. Zeno lectures in the Stoa
Pcecile at Athens.
277. Death of Metrodorus.
276. Zeno, invited to the Court
of Macedonia, sends Per-
saeusinhisplace. Aratus
of Soli at the same court.
270/69. Death of Epicurus.
Hermarchus succeeds.
264/3. Death of Zeno. Cle-
anthessucceeds. Aristo,
fieriiltis and Dionysius
secede and foun4 inde-
pendent schools.
B.C.
CONTEMPORARY EVENTS
D i o d o r u s Cronus and
Stilpo famous in the Me-
garian School.
294. Siege of Athens and conse-
quent famine.
288/4. Death of Theophrastus.
Strato of Lampsacus suc-
ceeds.
277/6. Antigonus Gonatas, now
King of Macedonia. The
kingdoms formed out of
Alexander's conquests
(Egypt, Syria, etc.) per-
manently established.
276/5. Death of Polemo.
Crates of Athens suc-
ceeds, followed a few
years later by Arcesilas
of Pitane.
c. 275/70. Death of Pyrrho at
Elis.
275 (or later). Timon settles at
Athens, where he writes
his philosophic satires or
sm.
270/68. Death of Strato. Lyco
succeeds.
241/0. Death of Arcesilas.
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE xvii
RISE OF THE NEW SCHOOLS
B.C.
232/1. Death of Cleanthes.
Chrysippus third head
of the Stoa.
208/4. D e a th of Chrysippus.
Zeno of Tarsus fourth
head of the Stoa.
CONTEMPORARY EVENTS
B.C.
c. 230/225. Death of Timon.
202. Zama. Rome victorious
over Carthage.
CONFLICT OF THE SCHOOLS AND DEVELOPMENT OF DOCTRINE
190/85. Birth of Panaetius at Rhodes.
? 180. Death of Zeno of Tarsus. Diogenes the Babylonian fifth
head of the Stoa.
168. Pydna. Macedonia crushed by Rome.
166. Polybius arrives at Rome. (Returned to Greece 150.)
155. Diogenes the Stoic, Carneades the Academic and Critolaus
the Peripatetic, at Rome as envoys from Athens.
? 152. Death of Diogenes the Babylonian. Antipater of Tarsus
sixth head of the Stoa.
146. Destruction of Corinth and Carthage.
144. Panaetius and Polybius at Rome. Scipio the Younger a
patron of Greek learning and philosophy.
141. Panaetius completes two books On Duty. He accompanies
Scipio to the East (returns 139).
135, Birth of Posidonius at Apamea.
129. Death of Scipio the Younger.
129/8, Death of Carneades. Clitomachus (Hasdrubal) of Car-
thage the next head of the Academy.
? 128. Death of Antipater of Tarsus. Panaetius seventh head of
the Stoa. Hecato and Posidonius pupils of Panaetius.
? in. Death of Panaetius. Mnesarchus and Dardanus his suc-
cessors.
106. Birth of Cicero.
100-90. Posidonius travels in the West.
99. Approximate date of the birth of Lucretius [94 Jerome].
87/6. MithridaticWar. Visit ofPosidonius to Rome. PhiloofLa-
rissa,nowhead of theAcademy,removes toRome. Antiochus
of Ascalon protests in his Sosus against Philo's innovations.
Triumph of Eclecticism over Scepticism in the Academy.
78, Cicero /studies at Athens and Rhodes; attends lectures by
Antiochus of Ascalon and Posidonius.
xviii CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE
69. Antiochus of Ascalon present at the Battle of Tigranocerta,
not long before his death.
55. Death of Lucretius on the Ides of October, in his 44th year.
His poem De Rerum Natura subsequently edited by Cicero.
Philodemus of Gadara, the author of numerous Epicurean
treatises, severely censured, though not by name, in Cicero's
speech against his patron Calpurnius Piso.
54. Cicero, De Republics.
52. Cicero, De Legibus.
c. 50. Death of Posidonius at Rhodes.
46. Death of Cato at Utica.
45. Cicero, Academica, De Finibus, Tusculan Disputations.
44. Cicero, De Natura Deorum, De Divinatione, De Officiis
Assassination of Caesar.
43. Death of Cicero.
? 42. /Enesidemus, Pyrrhonean Hypotyposes.
PHILOSOPHY UNDER THE EARLY ROMAN EMPIRE
A.D.
34. Birth of the poet Persius.
41. Seneca writes Consolatio ad Mardam. He is banished to
Corsica.
49. Seneca, recalled from exile, becomes tutor of Nero, the future
Emperor. He writes De Ira, De Tranquillitate Animi, and
De Breuitate Vita*
54. Accession of Nero. Seneca becomes his minister.
54-59- Quinquennium Neronis. Seneca in power.
55. Seneca, De dementia.
c. 56. Seneca commences his Epistles to Lucilius.
62. Seneca attempts in vain to retire from the court. He writes
De Otio Sapientis.
Death of Persius.
63. Seneca writes the last four books of his Naturdles Qu&stiones.
65. Conspiracy of Piso betrayed, in which Lucan is implicated.
Many eminent Stoics, including Seneca, put to death.
Others are exiled.
66, Death ofPtus Xhrasea and Soranus Barea.
69, Musonius Rtifus, the teacher of Epictetus, intervenes in the
civil war between Vitellius and Vespasian.
75. Expulsion of philosophers from Rome. HeMdius Priscus is
banished and afterward forced to commit suicide. Muso-
nius Rufus is excepted from the decree.
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE xix
A.D.
c. 90. Plutarch lectures at Rome during the reign of Domitian.
93. Arulenus Rusticus put to death for eulogising Thrasea.
Domitian issues a second edict for the expulsion of philoso-
phers. Epictetus retires to Nicopolis, where he afterward
worked successfully as a teacher for many years.
117. Accession of Hadrian. Epictetus still living, if, as is said, he
was favoured by Hadrian.
130. Arrian, who had committed to writing the Discourses and
Encheiridion of his teacher Epictetus, while resident at
Athens, becomes Consul Suffectus under Hadrian,
131. Birth of Galen.
161. Accession of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus; the philosopher on
the throne.
164. Galen comes to Rome, where he resided for the rest of his life.
172-175. Campaigns of theEmperor Marcus on the Danube against
the Quadi and Marcomanni. In the intervals of these cam-
paigns he seems to have commenced his Meditations, or at
least Books I and II, which are subscribed "among the
Quadi" and "at Carnuntum."
176. Four chairs of philosophy at the University of Athens endowed
by the Emperor for (i) Stoics, (2) Epicureans, (3) Aca-
demics, (4) Peripatetics.
180. Death of Marcus Aurelius*
180 (or shortly afterward). Lucian writes his Alexander.
180-200. Approximate date for the writings of Sextus Empiricus^
the seventh in the Sceptical succession from ^Enesidemus.
c. 200. Approximate date of the inscription set up at (Enoanda by
Diogenes, an Epicurean teacher.
201. Death of Galen.
221-235. Alexander Severus, Emperor. Approximate date for the
Lives of Philosophers compiled by Diogenes Laertius, who
ends his list of the Sceptics with Saturninus, the pupil of
Sextus Empiricus.
STOIC AND EPICUREAN
STOIC AND EPICUREAN
CHAPTER I
THE EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM
It is not often that a turning point in the history
of thought synchronises with some great social
or political change. But the age of the Diadochi,
that period of stress and storm in which the Stoic and
Epicurean systems took their rise, is severed by a
wide gulf from the previous course of Greek civili-
sation. Alexander's conquests, while extending Hel-
lenism to the farthest East, had rudely shattered the
old order of the Greek world and made way for the
new order of wide territorial kingdoms destined
eventually to be swallowed up in the Roman empire.
The city-states, which had played so honourable a
part in the past, retained as a rule the control of their
municipal affairs, but the virtual loss of indepen-
dence tended inevitably to loosen the ties of civic and
local patriotism in the fatherland itself. The change
in the political system involved a corresponding
change in the position of the individual. The very
foundation of political theory, even to Plato and
Aristotle, had been the life of a small civic com-
munity, and when this was undermined the alert
Greek intelligence recognised the significant conse-
quences for ethics. As the old, outworn sanctions
disappeared, they were replaced by new social
3
4 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
obligations at once more individual and more uni-
versal. The conception of the narrow canton-state
enlarged to that of the nation, and in the process, of
rime nationality tended to become cosmopolitan.
Already the course of philosophic inquiry had
been profoundly changed. The earliest Greek think-
ers started with the study of nature: as we might
say in modern phrase, they set out to discover the
constitution and properties of matter. Then in
that age of enlightenment which we associate with
the name of the Sophists there came a reaction,
and attention was directed to literature and culture
in a word, to humanism. Socrates confined his
inquiries to human conduct and to man, emphasis-
ing, as no one had done before him, the importance
of opinion for determining action. Henceforth the
main interest of speculation embraced the subject
as well as the object, the problem of knowledge
even more than the problem of nature. Socrates
had declared knowledge, or correct opinion, the
sole basis for moral conduct, and his commanding
personality combined with the schools which sprang
from him to perpetuate this untenable position. It
is in Stoicism, and not in the schools founded by the
immediate disciples of the master, that we find the
Socratic tradition most faithfully represented. Ac-
cordingly, from this point of view we proceed to
consider the historical antecedents of Stoicism.
Zeno, the founder of the school, was a native
of Citium, a Greek colony in Cyprus. In that
island the Greek settlers had a checkered history
and found it difficult to make headway against
men of alien, especially Semitic nationality. Pos-
sibly Zeno himself, in spite of his Greek name, may
have been ofmixed descent, for he was often taunted
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 5
with being a Phoenician. The chronology is not
quite certain, but we have the testimony of his dis-
ciple Persaeus that Zeno was twenty-two when he
came to Athens, and died at the age of seventy-two.
The year of his death may be fixed at 264 B.C., and,
reckoning backward, we obtain 336 B. C. for his
birth and 314 B. C. for his arrival at Athens. There
he studied under Crates the Cynic, Stilpo and Dio-
dorus Cronus of the Megarian school, and Polemo
the Academic. After a long time spent in study
(the precise statement of twenty years seems a
round number), he opened a school of his own not
later than 294 B. C. He selected for the scene of
his lectures a public place in Athens memorable for
the beauty of its decoration. This was the Stoa
Poecile, a colonnade or cloister rather than a porch,
on the north or south-east side oftheAgora or market-
place, which the genius of Polygnotus and Micon
had adorned with magnificent paintings or frescoes,
amongthem one representing the battle ofMarathon.
From the place of instruction the school derived its
name called at first Zenonians, they were ever after-
ward known as Stoics, men of the porch. The per-
sonal appearance of Zeno is minutely described for
us. He carried his head on one side, was lean,
flabby, delicate, short in stature, with swarthy com-
plexion and stout calves. After Demetrius, the
besieger of cities, became king of Macedonia, he
and his son, Antigonus Gonatas, made repeated
visits to Athens, in consequence of which the latter
became Zeno's pupil and remained his friend until
his death. The personal relations of Zeno and
Antigonus are honourable to both. By the Athenian
people, also, Zeno was held in the highest esteem
for the nobility of his character. The statement
6 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
that they deposited the keys of their citadel with
him is doubtless an invention, but the request of
Antigonus that he should receive a public funeral
may well have been granted, even if the decree to
this effect preserved by our authority
1
be not genu-
ine. The excessive frugality and even parsimony of
his life impressed observers no less than his moral
earnestness, dignity, and affability, and some may
be disposed to see in them Semitic traits of character.
Among his pupils Persaeus, also from Citium, lived
in the same house with Zeno, who sent him as his
substitute to the court of Antigonus when he de-
clined the king's invitation for himself. Next may
be mentioned Aristo of Chios, Herillus of Carthage,
and Dionysius of Heraclea, in Pontus, all three of
whom diverged in various ways from their master's
teaching. Other pupils were Aratus of Soli, in Ci-
licia, the author of an extant astronomical poem,
Sphaerus of Bosporus, the friend and adviser of the
reforming Spartan king Cleomenes, and lastly Clean-
thes of Assos, who succeeded to the headship of the
school and held it from 264 to 232 B. C. The story
goes that Cleanthes had been a pugilist; for nine-
teen years he attended the lectures of Zeno by day,
while earning a frugal livelihood by toilsome occu-
pations at night. To some he was known as the
second Hercules, but others gave him the nickname
of the Ass, on account of his patience and endur-
ance and a certain slowness and dulness of intellect,
of which he was himself painfully conscious. His
was, in truth, a reflective, brooding nature not devoid
of political imagination, a fact to which the extant
fragments of his verse bear witness. The Stoics
held that under certain circumstances suicide was
1
Diogenes LaSrtius, VII, 10-12.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 7
justified, and, as our historical sources are both
scanty and imperfect, this doctrine may be the only
ground-work for the tradition that not only Cleanthes
but also his master Zeno and his pupil Chrysippus,
ended their days by suicide. We are told ofCleanthes
that, when taunted with old age, he replied: "Yes,
I
%
am willing to be gone, but when I see myself
sound in every part, writing and reading, I am again
tempted to linger." At last, however, when he
was suffering from an ulcer on the tongue, his
physician advised him to abstain from food for a
while as a means of cure. After two days of ab-
stinence he was completely cured and advised by the
physician to return to his ordinary way of life. But
he said: "Since I have gone so far on the road, it
would be a pity not to finish the journey/
5
Ac-
cordingly, he continued his fasting and died.
At the time of Cleanthes the outlines of the sys-
tem were still plastic. With all his reverence for
his master, Cleanthes did not hesitate to introduce
many modifications. In particular, he made the
system more rigorously monistic and pantheistic, and
we now meet with the doctrine of tension, which
distinguishes Stoic materialism from all conception
of matter as dead and inert. Under Cleanthes the
school did not exactly flourish. In controversy it
was pressed hard, not only by the Epicureans, from
the first its uncompromising foes, but from another
side by the Sceptics of the New Academy. But if
the qualities of Cleanthes were not fitted to shine in
polemic, the next head of the school made up for
all such deficiencies. This was Chrysippus of Soli,
in Cilicia, who lived till after 208 B.C. Of this ex-
traordinary man the saying ran: "Had there been
no Chrysippus, there had been no Porch"; which
8 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
probably means, not that he saved the school from
extinction, though this may well have been the case,
but that he reduced its doctrine to a final and un-
alterable form. In doing so he exercised a moder-
ating influence, mediating between extreme utter-
ances, reconciling conflicting opinions, removing
inconsistencies, obviating objections, and rounding
offthe whole with numerous contributions ofhis own.
His aim was avowedly to interpret Zeno's utterances,
but occasionally,to avoid all risk ofmisunderstanding,
he had to restate them. His ingenuity and acumen
were unequalled. "Give me the doctrines,
33
he is
reported to have said to Cleanthes; "I will find out
the proofs for myself.
33
He was short of stature, so
much so that a jesting Epicurean, seeing a statue of
him in the Ceramicus eclipsed by a neighbouring
equestrian figure, remarked that a more appropriate
name than Chrysippus, "Gold-Horse,
33
would have
been Crypsippus, or "Horse-hidden.
35
He was the
most voluminous of all ancient writers, being cred-
ited with seven hundred separate rolls. He was not
averse to padding, and made huge citations from
other authors, if we may trust the anecdote that
some one, being asked what he was reading, replied,
"The Medea of Chrysippus,
33
so largely had the
Stoic drawn upon the drama of Euripides for illus-
tration of his argument. The logic of Stoicism is
almost entirely his creation, and he contributed
much to recast its psychology and epistemology.
These, then, were the men who moulded into
shape the Stoic system, and in the form in which
it was fashioned by them it endured for centuries.
Its adherents grew and multiplied, and, although
they always had to contend with powerful rivals in
the Epicureans, Academics, and Peripatetics, they
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 9
gradually extended their influence until in the first
century of the imperial era their claim to be recog-
nised as the dominant school of philosophy passed
almost unchallenged. Stoicism owed this success, in
the first place, to the strength and earnestness of its
moral teaching. Everyone knows thatthey regarded
virtue as the only good, the one thing in life worth
striving for; but this had already been proclaimed
to the world by those earlier followers of Socrates,
the Cynics. It is by comparing the basis of their
moral teaching with that of the Cynics that the dis-
tinctive features ofthe Stoics can best be understood.
The Cynics were revolutionists who would willingly
dissolve the ties of the family and political society
and reduce men to the state of nature. They were
individualists and carried their contempt for con-
vention and, we may add, for decency and order
to lengths which shocked the sentiments of the aver-
age man. Zeno for a time imbibed and reproduced
the doctrines of the Cynics, and wrote at least one
celebrated work while under their influence. This
was his Republic, most probably intended as a cor-
rection and criticism of Plato's great dialogue bear-
ing the same title. In it Zeno imagined a universal
state with one government and one manner of life
for all mankind, in which there should be no organi-
sation of separate nationalities under their several
laws and no distinctions, such as had hitherto pre-
vailed, between.Greek and barbarian, bond and free.
Here the Cynic teaching finds complete expression
and full development. The breaking down of
existing barriers is merely a step toward the realisa-
tion of a more perfect society, the abrogation of
the discordant laws from separate states and nations,
but the preliminary to the promulgation of the one
10 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
universal law which holds this more perfect society
together. But what is this law ? The Cynic inter-
preted the precept "Follow Nature" negatively and
destructively by ridiculing the institutions of his
country and the very idea of patriotism and by mak-
ing a violent protest in his daily life and behaviour
against the traditional code and the established order.
Thus nature became almost another name for anar-
chism and unparalleled license was permitted to
individual caprice. To Zeno, on the contrary, the
natural was the rational and the first mark of reason
was self-consistency. A rational life must follow a
single harmonious plan, whereas the paths of folly
are many and various, but always stamped with
inconsistency and contradiction. In this postulate
of a rational law the Stoics had a precursor in Hera-
clitus. His term for itwas Logos, sometimes rendered
into English by Word, as in the introduction to the
fourth gospel, more often by Reason. Heraclitus
emphasised, as no previous thinker had done, the
universal change and mutability of all things that
we know, and yet he maintained as stoutly that all
change obeys reason or law. To him the Logos is
not only a sovereign ordinance which nature in-
variably obeys, but also the divine reason, immanent
in nature and man, which possesses intelligence and
thinks nay, is itself intelligence.
This, at any rate, seems to follow from his frag-
mentary utterances concerning it. The most rele-
vant are: "Having hearkened notunto me, but to the
Logos, it is wise to confess that all things are one."
1
"This Logos is always existent, but men fail to un-
derstand it both before they have heard it and when
they have heard it for the first time. For, although
1
Fragment i, Bywater.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 11
all things happen through this Logos, men seem as if
they had no acquaintance with it when they make
acquaintance with such works and words as I ex-
pound when I divide each thing according to its
nature and explain how it really is. The rest of
mankind are unconscious of what they do when
awake, just as they forget what they do when
asleep/'
l
"There is but one wisdom, to understand
the knowledge by which all things are steered
through all/'
2
"Intelligence is common to all
things. Those who speak with understanding must
strongly cleave to that which is common to all
things, even as a city cleaves to law, and much
more strongly. For all human laws are nurtured
by the one divine law; for this prevails as much
as it will, and suffices for all and has something
over."
3
"Although the Logos is universal, most
men live as if they had a private intelligence
of their own/'
4
"Men are at variance with the
Logos, which is their most constant companion."
5
It is also clear that, since Heraclitus had not
learned to separate the material from the spiritual,
he identified his Logos with that which he con-
ceived to be the ultimate reality, the primal ele-
ment of fire. Of this he says that "it is ever-
living, always was, is, and shall be";
6
and the Logos,
too, is, as we saw, eternal. And again, using
"Thunderbolt" as a semi-oracular term for fire, he
says "the thunderbolt steers all things,"
7
language
which suggests an intelligent helmsman, such as
is his Logos. Thus the Logos on its material side is
Fire, and Fire on its spiritual side is the Logos.
1
Fragment 2. 2
Fragment 19.
3
Fragment 91.
4
Fragment 92.
6
Fragment 93.
6
Fragment 20.
7
Fragment 28.
12 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
But this Fire Heraclitus expressly affirms to be one
with the universal order or the universe. "This
world-order, the same in all things, no one of gods
or men has made; but it always was, is, and shall
be ever-living fire, kindled in due measure and ex-
tinguished in due measure."
1
"God is day and
night, winter and summer, war and peace, satiety
and hunger. But he is changed, just as fire, when
mingled with different kinds of incense, is named
after the savour of each."
2
"To God all things are
beautiful and good and right, but men consider
some things wrong and others right."
3
God, then,
is the unity in which all opposites are reconciled,
the one unchanging ground of all change and plu-
rality. It makes no difference whetherwe name Him
Zeus, or Fire, or Logos. As Logos, He brings all
things to pass, for He is the Wisdom which steers
all things; as Fire, He is the substance which creates,
sustains, and in the end, perhaps, reabsorbs into itself
the world.
The exact interpretation of the Heraclitean frag-
ments is a matter of controversy, and it may
readily be conceded that the above conclusions
'are strongly tinctured with Stoic dogma. Some
scholars deny that in the time of Heraclitus the word
Logos had acquired the signification of Reason.
It meant no more, they say, than "word" or "dis-
course." But on the other hand there is strong and
explicit testimony that Zeno and Cleanthes studied
Heraclitus and derived from him many of their
cardinal doctrines. The function of Zeno, as of
almost every contemporary philosopher, was not
to originate, but to combine. Greece had long out-
lived the first fresh ardour of speculation and dis-
1
Fragment 20. 2
Fragment 36.
8
Fragment 61.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 13
covery. Moreover, since the time of Socrates the
practical needs of the individual had become the
paramount consideration. The question: "What
must I do ?" was more pressing even than that other:
"What can I know?" Judged superficially, the
Stoic account of the universe has nothing new about
it. Some parts could be traced to Heraclitus,
others to Aristotle. But even in appropriating the
results of previous philosophers the Stoics imparted
to them a new and fuller meaning by their whole
mental attitude. Aristotle's dualism of matter and
form, the two principles into which he analyses in-
dividual and particular existence, they transformed
into the antithesis of matter and force or energy,
which they united in the single conception of body.
They fastened upon the pantheism everywhere un-
derlying the utterances of Heraclitus and presented
it in its most mature and unambiguous form.
Whether Zeno himself took this decisive step the re-
mains of his writings do not sufficiently indicate. It
may be that he never went beyond recognising God
and formless matter as the two distinct principles, co-
existing in all that is. But in the view of Cleanthes
and Chrysippus, so far as we can judge from the
evidence, not only do these two factors coexist, but
ultimately they are regarded as one and the same.
We thus arrive at a conception of the universe as one
Being endowed with life and reason, one whole to
which all living and all intelligent creatures are
related as members, a conception which is most
familiar to English readers from Pope's lines:
All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body Nature is and God the soul,
1
1
Essay on Man, I, 267,
14 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
It is a fortunate accident that in the wreck
of the entire literature of the early Stoics the famous
hymn to Zeus by Cleanthes has been preserved.
Short as it is, this is the only document ofany^eminent
Stoic which we possess at first hand and in full. It
cannot be too often remembered that we are cut
off by unkind fortune from direct access to all the
other original authorities. For our knowledge of
Stoicism we depend either upon scanty fragments
of the masters' own writings laboriously collected bymodern scholars from the whole range of classical
literature or upon the diligence of compilators who,
centuries after the foundation of Stoicism, put to-
gether for their own purposes and in their own lan-
guage the main outlines of the system as it appeared
to them. Other writings, it is true, have come down
to us from Stoic authors, but in some cases they have
small philosophical importance, e. g., Aratus, Cleo-
medes, Heraclides; in others they belong to the
Roman age, and no one will maintain that Persius
or Seneca, Epictetus or Marcus Aurelius committed
themselves to a single statement of doctrine on their
own authority. The hymn of Cleanthes has been
thus translated by the late Dr. James Adam:
O God most glorious, called by many a name,
Nature's great King, through endless years the same;
Omnipotence, who by thy just decree
Controllest all, hail, Zeus, for unto thee
Behoves thy creatures in all lands to call.
We are thy children, we alone, of all
On earth's broad ways that wander to and fro,
Bearing thine image wheresoe'er we go.
Wherefore with songs of praise thy power I will
forth shew.
Lo! yonder heaven, that round the earth is wheeled,
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 15
Follows thy guidance, still to thee doth yield
Glad homage; thine unconquerable hand
Such flaming minister, the levin-brand,
Wieldeth, a sword two-edged, whose deathless might
Pulsates through all that Nature brings to light;
Vehicle of the universal Word, that flows
Through all, and in the light celestial glows
Of stars both great and small. O King of Kings
Through ceaseless ages, God, whose purpose brings
To birth, whate'er on land or in the sea
Is wrought, or in high heaven's immensity;
Save what the sinner works infatuate.
Nay, but thou knowest to make crooked straight:
Chaos to thee is order: in thine eyes
The unloved is lovely, who did'st harmonise
Things evil with things good, that there should be
One Word through all things everlastingly.
One Word whose voice alas! the wicked spurn;
Insatiate for the good their spirits yearn:
Yet seeing see not, neither hearing hear
God's universal law, which those revere,
By reason guided, happiness who win.
The rest, unreasoning, diverse shapes of sin
Self-prompted follow: for an idle name
Vainly they wrestle in the lists of fame:
Others inordinately Riches woo,
Or dissolute, the joys of flesh pursue.
Now here, now there theywander, fruitless still,
For ever seeking good and finding ill.
Zeus the all-bountiful, whom darkness shrouds,
Whose lightning lightens in the thunder clouds;
Thy children save from error's deadly sway:
Turn thou the darkness from their souls away:
Vouchsafe that unto knowledge they attain;
For thou by knowledge art made strong to reign
O'er all, and all things rulest righteously.
So by thee honoured, we will honour thee,
Praising thy works continually with songs,
16 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
As mortals should; nor higher meed belongs
E'en to the gods, than justly to adore
The universal law for evermore.
The first thing which strikes us is the religious
tone. The great Stoic dogmas are presented, not
as physics or metaphysics, but as theology, the
truths of natural religion in poetic form. The
Stoic's attitude to God is that of a child to his father,
dependent and yet responsible. It is his duty, but
also his privilege and reward, to praise God, and his
one prayer is for knowledge, whereby alone he can be
saved from the miseries of sin. The next thing to
note is the remarkable blending of characteristics
which to us seem utterly opposed. Zeus is addressed
as a personal God, and yet by the whole tenor and by
certain Heraclitean echoes "the levin/' that is fire,
like the thunderbolt, "one Word" (Logos) "through
all things everlastingly, one Word whose voice alas!
the wicked spurn" we are forced to believe that
He is not only the author of all things, but also in
essence identical with all things, save only the
works ofwicked men in their folly.
1
But, seeing that
this same Zeus "did harmonise things evil with
things good," is in fact the unity of opposites, the
one seeming exception vanishes from the higher
stand-point. Again, while all the universe is ruled
by Zeus and all things everywhere are wrought by
His purpose, yet it is evident that man holds a privi-
leged position. It is our bounden duty to requite
God with honour becausewe have been honoured by
Him. In other words, man is the only rational
creature on earth and the possession of reason
stamps him with the divine image. The result has
1
"Save what the sinner works infatuate" in the translation above.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 17
been called by a quite permissible oxymoron a
curious personal kind of pantheism. Something of
the same sort is to be found not only in Heraclitus,
but earlier still in Xenophanes, who affirmed the
unity of God as a Being possessed of perception and
intelligence not less strongly than he proclaimed the
unity ofthe world, of all that exists.
Centuries afterward in modern England a writer
wholly unacquainted with ancient philosophy, either
blending two phases of belief or making the transi-
tion from one to the other, embodied the very
essence of Stoicism in lines which deserve a place be-
side the hymn of Cleanthes.
O God, within my breast,
Almighty, ever-present Deity!
Life, that in me has rest,
As I undying life have power in thee.
With wide-embracing love
Thy spirit animates eternal years,
Pervades and broods above,
Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates, and rears.
Though earth and man were gone,
And suns and universes ceased to be,
And thou wert left alone,
Every existence would exist in thee.
There is not room for Death,
No atom that his might could render void :
Thou Thou art Being, Breath,
AndwhatThou art may never be destroyed.
1
The hymn of Cleanthes strikes a note of ex-
ultant joy, of serene and unwavering optimism.
1
Emily Bronte, Poems.
18 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
This temper is assuredly not that which is usually
associated with the Stoics, conceived too often in
the popular imagination as severe, morose, apathetic
persons, stifling all emotions with pride, or else, on
the lines of Cicero's famous delineation of Cato, as
stern, unbending, impracticable precisians in short,
moral prigs, the Pharisees of the pagan world. It is
matter of history that in their dealings with their
fellow-men they often presented these unamiable
traits, but from the few glimpses we have of their
inmost feelings and that attitude to the universe
which constitutes the essence of religion, what is
most clearly distinguishable is joy and gratitude,
serene confidence and unwavering submission. Here
again is a marked divergence from popular concep-
tion, which has seized upon apathy as a prominent
trait of the Stoic without comprehending the term
aright. It will hereafter be seen that the suppres-
sion of all emotion never was and never could be
a Stoic tenet. The religious tone of cheerful opti-
mism is as conspicuous in Epictetus as in Cleanthes.
Not more firm is the conviction of the Hebrew
Psalmist that all things must go well, since the Lord
reigneth.
It is now time to examine more closely the na-
ture of this pantheism and, if possible, to determine
its exact relation to other modes of Greek thought.
It bears a superficial resemblance to more than one
tendency or current of previous speculation. The
Ionian natural philosophers in search of a single
principle by which they could explain the manifold
variety ofnature are usually described as hylozoists, a
term which implies that, overlooking the distinction
between organisms and inorganic substances, they
endowed all matter with the qualities of living things
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 19
by supposing it capable of self-determination.
1
But,
as system after system developed, the inquiry be-
came more complicated and a cause of motion, life,
and consciousness was postulated, in contradis-
tinction from the things which exhibited motion and
life. Nowhere is this dualism more prominent than
in Aristotle, who defined God as an immaterial
essence. Aristotle's deity by the attraction which he
exerts upon the world is the cause of motion, the
ultimate cause of all the ordered regularity and life
of nature. In framing such a system Aristotle was
confessedly influenced by Anaxagoras, who, in order
to explain the progress from chaos to universal
order, introduced his unique element of Nous or
Intellect, without definitely determining its exact
nature, so that it is still matter ofcontroversy whether
he intended by it a spiritual principle or merely a
material substance, fluid or gaseous, of greater purity
and fineness than the rest and endowed with the
power of ordering and knowing. The point to
notice is that both Anaxagoras and Aristotle diverge
from the beaten track of Ionian speculations by
postulating a transcendent cause or first principle.
And this is still more true of Plato. For him the
highest reality existed in a world of ideas set over
against the phenomenal world in which, however,
the ideas were somehow immanent. On the other
hand, Democritus, the apostle of materialism, had
declared that all the phenomena of motion and life
followed by natural necessity, when once immutable
1
Hylo2XDism has left its mark on language. Take the term "body."
Both in Greek and in English it is applied, not only to animate things, the
organisms of the biologist, but quite as freely to such as are inanimate.
In the latter signification it is firmly established as a scientific term.
ThusNewton's laws of motion are enunciated of "bodies," and astrono-
mers talk of the heavenly "bodies."
20 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
atoms, devoid alike of reason, consciousness, sense,
and instinct, were conceived as moving, colliding,
and combining in infinite space. Thus Democritus
put an end to hylozoism without resorting to tran-
scendence. When compared with the theory either
of Democritus or of Aristotle cosmic pantheism ex-
hibits a retrograde tendency. Conceptions which
it had been the business of philosophers to separate
are again confused and the world interpreted on the
analogy of the individual organism, or, more pre-
cisely, of a rational human being. This analogy
may be traced back to Thales, if his apothegm,
"All things are full of gods," is rightly interpreted
by Aristotle to imply a belief in a world-soul.
1
Anaximenes, a later Milesian philosopher, is much
more explicit. "Even as our soul, which is air/'
says Anaximenes, "holds us together, so breath and
air encompass the whole universe/'
2
As man in-
hales from outside the breath which constitutes his
soul, so the world, a similar living, breathing whole,
respires into the sea of air which Anaximenes con-
ceived to surround and support it. Some such proc-
ess of cosmical respiration into the circumambient
infinite was also a Pythagorean tenet. Pythagorean,
too, in origin is the conception of the world-soul in
Plato's Timceus, endowed with motion and intelli-
gence, the sole cause in virtue of which the body of
the universe, and therefore the universe as a whole,
possesses life and motion. There is, then, ample
evidence that the Greeks were familiar with concep-
tions of which pantheism would be the natural out-
growth and the names of Heraclitus, Xenophanes,
and Parmenides suffice to prove that pantheism
1
Aristotle, De Anima> I, 5, 411, a. 8.
3
Fragment 2, Diels3
(Fragmente der Vorsokraliker, ed. 2).
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 21
of some sort, though distinct from Stoic pantheism,
did arise on Greek soil. On the other hand, it has
been conjectured that Zeno's Semitic origin is the
clue to this tenet of his system. Undoubtedly, there
are many passages in the Old Testament ascribing
the operations ofnature directly toGod,which favour
the notion of divine immanence and omnipresence.
Any one who reads certain of the Psalms
x
or the
finale of the Book of Job,
2
or certain passages in the
second Isaiah,
3
can hardly escape this conclusion.
"Whither," says the Psalmist, "shall I go from
thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy pres-
ence ? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there;
if I make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou art there;
if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand
lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I
say, Surely the darkness shall overwhelm me, and
the light about me shall be night, even the darkness
hideth not from thee, but the night shineth as the
day: the darkness and the light are both alike to
thee."
4
Further, the whole series of events in the
world of nature, organic and inorganic, all celestial
phenomena, all atmospheric conditions, all vital
processes, so far as known to these Hebrew writers,
are attributed to the immediate agency of God.
That very order and regularity which Democritus
and Epicurus found incompatible with divine inter-
ference in the world the Hebrew writers adduce
as irrefragable testimony that God is manifest
in all His works. "He appointed the moon for
seasons: the sun knoweth his going down."
5
And
1 E. g.j Pss. 104, 107, 139.
2
Especially chapters 36 to 41,
8 E. g., c. 45. From later Jewish writings may be cited Eccksiasticus,
c. 43-
4 Ps. 139, 7-12.
B Ps. 104, 19.
22 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
again, "He saith to the snow, Fall thou on the earth;
likewise to the shower of rain."
*
So far, therefore, as
the unity and immanence ofGod are concerned, the
conjecture appears very plausible. Again, the ex-
clusion of wickedness and sin from divine agency is
as conspicuous in the writings of the Hebrew proph-
ets as in the hymn of Cleanthes. From this last
point of agreement, however, no cogent inference
can be drawn, in view of Plato's equally emphatic
pronouncement that God is the author of good, of
good alone and never of evil.
2
But however great
the similarity, however strong the case for Semitic
elements in Stoicism, it would be in vain to seek any
Biblical parallel for the final step to monism. Man
and his Maker, God and the world are everywhere
kept distinct, even in the analogy of the potter and
the clay.
3
Jahveh is no Brahma, consubstantial
with all that is. On the whole, then, it seems more
reasonable to attribute this retrograde step by which
the hylozoism of the lonians was revived in an al-
tered form to purely Greek influences.
Contemporary Greek thought was not more in-
clined to tolerate the idealism of Plato and Aris-
totle than the mechanism and atomism of Democ-
ritus. The Cynics, under whom Zeno studied,
were nominalists and denied the separate existence
of any reality corresponding to a general notion,
such as the Platonists found in the ideas. The
school ofZeno was not nominalist, but conceptualist,
and expressly affirmed that the Platonic ideas were
notions in our minds, in modern phrase, universals.
Even among Aristotle's own immediate followers
the conception of a transcendent, immaterial deity
was surrounded with difficulties, and it is not sur-
1
Job, c. 37, v. 6. 2
Republic II, 379 C. 3
Isaiah, c. 45, v. 9.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 23
prising that Strato of Lampsacus, who succeeded
to the headship of the school on the death of Theo-
phrastus (circa 288 B. C.) dropped this tenet. He
saw no need for an external supernatural cause
and renounced the idea of God as a Being separate
and distinct from the world as a whole. For him,
v
as for Aristotle, nature is impersonal, a necessary
force, operating without consciousness or reflection.
The favourite argument with all the later schools
ran as follows. Whatever exists must act and be
acted upon. Action implies contact and therefore
body, since only corporeal things can touch and be
touched. From this it follows that such corporeal
things or bodies alone have real existence and every-
thing incorporeal is non-existent. The argument is
worthless, action and passivity being stricdy limited
to the kind of action and the kind of passivity occur-
ring between bodies in contact, but it is useful as
determining for us more precisely what is meant by
the terms existence, body, and causation. Body
is defined as that which is capable of extension in
three dimensions. Such bodies exist: our own
bodies, external things. This mode of existence is
given and it is the only mode which the Stoics recog-
nised. Body is that which acts and is acted upon,
such interaction being a special case of causation.
By cause the Stoics always mean efficient cause,
which implies the communication of motion from
one body to another. All bodies can be moved and
modified. For all that is or happens there is an
immediate cause or antecedent, and as "cause"
means "cause ofmotion," and only body can actupon
body, it follows that this antecedent cause is itself as
truly corporeal as the body upon which it acts.
Such a conception of the world as made up
24 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of particular bodies acting and reacting upon each
other might suffice for Epicurus, but it is only the
husk of the Stoic doctrine, unless to activity we add
soul, life, and mind. Let us see where and how the
two materialistic systems differ. To Epicurus the
atoms are unchangeable, both quantitatively and
qualitatively. They never waste away, they never
pass from one state to another. They always
remain perfectly inelastic solids. They move ever-
lastingly with the same ceaseless motion and the
same uniform velocity. Epicurus was not aware that
he had here combined incompatible attributes.
The Stoic primary matter, on the contrary, though
quantitatively constant, indestructible, incapable of
increase or diminution, is not qualitatively constant,
but capable of transformation. It becomes by turns
all the four elements. The difference between these
states of the primary substance depends upon the
greater or less degree of tension. Matter being
infinitely divisible, in whatever state it is, whether
solid, liquid, or gaseous, it must be in virtue of its
own inherent force that it possesses any continuity
or coherence whatsoever. In a rarefied condition
the exceedingly fine particles of air and fire are sub-
jected to the greatest strain. In earth and water
continuity and coherence are attained by the exertion
ofless force: in otherwords, the tension ofthe primary
substance is slackened. The same variety of tension
is presented when inorganic substances are compared
with organic. In the vital principle of animals or
the principle of growth in plants, technically known
as "nature," primary matter exhibits a degree of
tension far greater than is necessary to give coherence
and numerical identity to stones or metals. Again,
to the Stoics the sum of being, the totality of particu-
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 25
lar bodies is a whole and a unity which is living and
conscious, while the atoms of Epicurus are a mere
aggregate without unity, an infinite aggregate, but
no true whole and devoid of life, which belongs only
to particular things. This view of the world, how-
ever, as an infinite aggregate the Stoics rejected as
unsatisfactory and fell back upon the alternative
conception of the universe as a living whole or, in
modern phrase, a single organism. If, again, the
world is a living being, like other living beings, it has
a soul and we may distinguish the rational world-
soul from the world itself, as we distinguish the
human soul from the man himself. All particu-
lar things within the world must be its parts and
members or, more precisely, particular determina-
tions of its one substance, which is in eternal activity.
The determination of the particular by the universe
and of the part by the whole was a fundamental
doctrine of the Stoics. The single substance is at
once both force and matter; or rather, though we
can distinguish in it that which acts and that which
is acted upon, there is ultimately no difference
between these two phases or aspects of the one
same substance. It alone conditions and deter-
mines all particular things and processes and, ac-
cording to its variable relations to particulars, it
may be variously described. The divine Word or
Reason (Logos) is the power to produce and create,
to mould and form particulars, present in each
thing as its own germinal reason, z . e.y as its formative
force or vital principle. But, since all organic proc-
esses fulfil some purpose and have a rational end,
this same universal Reason must be regarded as an
overruling Providence in relation to all particular
occurrences. The course of the world, then, is a
26 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
rational order, an ordinance by which all individuals
should be guided in the development of their activity.
But this all-determining ordinance is likewise all-
compelling power, and in the unalterable succession
of causes and effects every event is necessary and
predestined. The universe would cease to fulfil
its purpose as a coherent whole, if any event took
place without an antecedent cause. There is no
such thing as chance: what appears to happen
through chance really happens from a cause which
we cannot discern. The Divine Providence extends
even to the smallest details of life; there are no ex-
ceptions to the working of natural necessity. This
assumption had first been made by Leucippus and
Democritus, but the Stoics were the only school that
carried out the thought in all its completeness, and
with them the natural necessity of every event fol-
lows, not from the motions of single parts, the sepa-
rate atoms, but from the living activity of the whole.
Thus God, Nature, Reason, World-Soul, Germinal
Reason, Law, Providence, Necessity, Destiny are
but expressions of the different relations in which the
one universe, the sum and whole of existence, stands
to particular things and events within it.
We have said above that the universal sub-
stance is at once both force and matter, and the
statement seems on the whole to offer the best
solution of certain difficulties inherent in the sys-
tem. At the same time it must be conceded that
while this is the logical consequence ofthe pantheistic
spirit of Stoicism, it is at first sight at variance with
the letter of its teaching. The orthodox Stoic ac-
count of nature starts with the recognition of two
principles, the one active, the other passive; in other
words, the one is God, the other is matter devoid of
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 27
quality. If this were an absolute distinction, the
account given above would be erroneous. It is
worth while, then, to inquire within what limits the
assumption of two principles is legitimate and how
these two are related to each other.
"We Stoics, as you know/
5
says Seneca, "distin-
guish in nature (in rerum natura) cause and matter
as conditions for all becoming. Matter is inert, in-
different to all determinations, and will remain in a
state of rest unless it be moved. Cause or reason
shapes matter and turns it at will in any direction,
producing out of matter a variety of objects. In
other words, that out of which all things are made
must be distinct from that by which all things are
made and this is what is meant by matter and
cause.'*
a
Seneca, be it observed, is speaking of the
world as we know it, in which particular things are
already formed or in process of formation and the
active causal principle, force, inseparable from the
passive principle, matter. The latter is conceived
as indeterminate, but capable of determination, as
in itself devoid of any quality, yet capable of as-
suming all qualities. As such, it is the germ or seed
of all Becoming and of the ordered universe of par-
ticular things. And this is equally true of the
contrasted principle, reason or force or God. He
also is capable ofbecoming all things and His eternal
substance contains the seeds of all Becoming. And
here there is a difficulty. Plutarch objects: "If
God is identified with matter, why is matter called
irrational? If, again, they are ultimately distinct,
if matter and reason separately exist, God is no
single supreme principle, but a composite being,
reason in matter." 2 So far as this difficulty is
1
Seneca, Episties, 65, 2. a
Plutarch, De Communikus Notitiis, 48.
28 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
inherent and fundamental in every pantheistic sys-
tem, it does not immediately concern us. Holding
as we do, that the two principles were ultimately
identified, if not by Zeno, at any rate by Cleanthes
and Chrysippus, we should rather be disposed to
ask another question: What led Zeno to assume two
distinct principles and why did Chrysippus retain
the distinction ? The problem admits of no au-
thoritative solution, from the scantiness of the
evidence. Indeed, we have not even the explicit
testimony of any Stoic writer to the ultimate identity
of the two principles in the mature system. But
the most probable explanation is based upon histori-
cal considerations and is in perfect accord with the
Stoic practice of incorporating and assimilating the
teaching of other schools. Thus Zeno's two prin-
ciples were suggested by Aristotle's analysis of the
particular thing into form and matter. For in-
corporeal form, however, which he would regard as
non-existent, Zeno substituted real and corporeal
cause or force. From the inherence of attributes in
a substratum he passed to the conception ofthe uni-
versal intermingling of corporeal qualities in things.
This last distinctive tenet calls for further ex-
planation. Let us endeavour to trace the steps
by which the Stoics were led to an explicit denial
that matter is impenetrable, that two bodies cannot
simultaneously occupy the same place. All that
really exists is body. But souls exist and qualities
exist, whence they infer that souls and qualities are
corporeal things. But the soul pervades the whole
body, as all the facts of animal life go to prove ; and
when two inorganic substances are mixed, the
qualities of the one pervade the whole substance of
the other. Suppose wine poured into water, whether
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 29
in a bowl or in a pond. The wine will gradually
extend over and permeate the whole of the water
until finally it is lost in the mixture in which each
fluid interpenetrates the other. This is not a case
of mechanical mixture, as when sand is mixed with
sugar and each particle of sand, as also each par-
ticle of sugar, retains its distinctive qualities; for,
according to the Stoics, every part of the one sub-
stance is interpenetrated by every part of the other.
Nor, again, is it analogous to chemical combination,
in which the constituent elements part with their
distinctive properties when the new compound is.
formed; for, according to the Stoics, soul and body,
substance and attribute retain each its own dis-
tinctive qualities when interpenetrated, as do wine
and water when intermingled. The clue to this
astonishing doctrine is found in another Stoic con-
ception, that the parts or faculties of the soul and the
attributes of bodies were currents, were matter, but
highly rarefied matter. At a time when there was
scarcely any scientific knowledge of matter in the
fluid,much less in the gaseous state, the fact that heat
expands and cold contracts gave rise to an ingenious
theory. The colder a substance, the more it coheres
and the less the tension of its parts. Increase the
heat and the tension is increased, until in fluids and
gases a high degree of tension is reached. Currents
of air, then, currents of heat, present that condition
of matter, fine, rare, and subtle, which to the Greek
mind seemed most akin to the incorporeal because,
as intangible and invisible, it escaped the observa-
tion of the senses. When, therefore, the attributes
and qualities of bodies, or the parts and-faculties of
soul, were declared to be corporeal things, per-
meating more solid bodies, it was in this guise that
30 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
they were imagined. Hence a curious inversion of
Platonic idealism. Plato said that a man is just
and musical by partaking in the ideas, the objective
realities, of justice and music: the Stoics said that a
man was just when he had the material of justice,
musical when he had the material of music within
him. While we justly condemn this wild specula-
tion as crude and baseless, we must remember that
even in modern science there is a region of unverified
hypotheses in which speculations on the nature of
electricity and the properties of ether play their part.
The statement that the universal substance is
at once both force and matter, and therefore that
the distinction between them is only transitory
and relative, is strongly confirmed by the Stoic cos-
mogony. In the world as it is we resolve each par-
ticular thing into form and matter, but let us go
back to the time before there was a heaven and earth
and review the work of creation. Here again the
analogy of the macrocosm and the microcosm is all-
important. The germination of a plant, the birth
of an animal implies a seed or ovum, moisture being
one indispensable condition. So, too, with a world,
which is evolved, attains maturity, and again perishes
by a process of orderly sequence stretching over an
immense period of time. Before the birth of the
world God alone existed, having absorbed into His
fiery substance all nature at a general conflagration.
At this stage the distinction between the soul and the
body of the universe, between the active principle,
God, and the passive principle, matter, is merged in
complete identity. In the words of Chrysippus, "the
universe is then its own soul and its own controlling
mind,"
*
and yet at the same time it never ceases to
1
Plutarch, De Stoicorum Repugnantiis, 41.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 31
be material substance with extraordinary physical
properties of temperature and tension. The nebular
theory of modern astronomers requires us to imag-
ine at some point oftime anterior to the formation of
the solar system a vast mass ofgaseous vapour at a
high temperature. This might serve as a picture of
the primary substance of the Stoics. The tension
throughout was enormous. From this ignited condi-
tion the primary substance passes through the stage
of vapour or "air" to that of water or moisture.
Here we pause to remark that the Stoics are follow-
ing Heraclitus, who reduced the constant transforma-
tion of the sensible world to a formula, the way
downward from fire to water and earth and the way
upward from earth to water and fire. There was
this difference, however, that to Heraclitus air was
a transition, not a state, whereas the Stoics, like
Aristotle, recognised air as one of their four element-
ary bodies'. Later Stoics date the birth of the world
from the stage when the primary substance is in
the moist or watery condition. Thus Seneca says:
"We maintain that it is fire which takes possession of
the universe and transforms all things into itself.
This fire dies down gradually, and when it is ex-
tinguished there is nothing else left in nature but
moisture. In moisture lies hidden the promise of
the world that is to be. Thus the universe ends in
fire and begins from moisture."
1
The seed, whether
ofvegetable or animal life, is fostered by moisture: the
seed of the world that is to be is the primary sub-
stance itself under the aspect of germinal reason.
In the next stage all the four elements are developed
out of this moisture. One part is precipitated in
the form of earth, another remains as water, a third
1
Seneca, Naturales Qucestionesf HI, 13, i.
32 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
part, evaporating, constitutes atmospheric air, and
air, again, enkindles fire out of itself. These four
elements not only account for the world of particular
things, in which they are combined in varying pro-
portions, but also by their relative positions massed
round the earth as centre they give the universe its
spherical form. A belt or sphere of air surrounding
land and sea is itself surrounded by the spherical
heaven or ether made of the purest fire and con-
taining the heavenly bodies.
The picture of the one universe consisting of these
concentric spheres dominated imagination from Eu-
doxus and Aristotle down to Dante and Copernicus.
It is, then, by no means peculiar to the Stoics.
They merely followed in the beaten track. The
science of that day had a huge admixture of unveri-
fied hypothesis and consequent error. The Stoics
took over from Plato and Aristotle the outlines, not
only of astronomy, but also of natural history with
the stereotyped division of organic life into plants,
animals, and rational beings. In these departments
their contributions call for no special notice. The two
elements, air and fire, situated further from the centre
of this Stoic universe and higher, ifwe look upward,
represent active force, the soul of the world; the
other two elements, earth and water, play the part
of passive matter, or the body of the world. Thus
primal unity is differentiated into force and matter,
soul and body, as well as into the variety and multi-
plicity of individual things. As these distinctions,
however, had their origin in time, so also will time
put an end to them. The parts undergo a perpetual
transformation; each individual thing that has come
into being by the combination of elements ceases to
be when they separate, and when the present cycle
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 33
has run its course all matter will be absorbed once
more into primary substance or deity and the world
be consumed in a general conflagration. This rest-
oration of all things becomes again the starting-point
for a new cycle, in which every phase of the world's
existence and every particular event is exactly re-
peated with unfailing regularity. Not many Stoic
dogmas lend themselves to poetic handling, but the
idea of a new era, ofa fresh start in universal history,
has sunk deep into the heart of mankind. Some-
times it is presented as the return of a weary world
to the happy innocence of a far-distant past, some-
times as a deliverance from the intolerable evils of
a worn-out state of society, but always as a con-
summation devoutly to be wished and heralded with
eager anticipation. To such hopes and aspirations
Virgil gave a splendid setting in his Fourth Eclogue.
Who the particular child was whose birth is there
foretold is a question which has greatly perplexed
the learned,
1
but in his glowing picture of the bles-
sings to follow its advent the poet has skilfully inter-
woven the old belief in the golden age and the reign
of Saturn with the Stoic doctrine of a restitution of
all things. Virgil sings of better, brighter times to
come, and yet for the realisation of this dream he
reverts to a primeval past. The age of the heroes
will in due course return, another Jason will go in
quest of the golden fleece, another Achilles will start
for the siege of Troy. The glamour with which^ the
poet's imagination invests the new order of things
tends to conceal the fundamental inconsistency: for,
if the new is but the repetition of the old, how can
1 See the recent volume, entitled VirgiFs Messianic Eclogue: Three
Studies, by J. B. Mayor, W. Warde Fowler, R. S. Conway. Also the
review by H. W. Garrod, in Classical Review, XXII, 149-
34 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the future be any improvement upon the experience
of the past ? According to the Stoics, as we have
seen, there is no advance. Both morally and
materially and in every exact detail the new is a
faithful reproduction of the old; whence it inevitably
follows that all the evil, as well as all the good, is
everlastingly perpetuated. This consideration comes
out more prominently in Shelley, whose adaptation of
the same theme in the final chorus of his Hellas is so
beautiful that I make no apology for quoting it at
length:.
The world's great age begins anew,
The golden years return,
The earth doth like a snake renew
Her winter weeds outworn:
Heaven smiles, and faiths and empires gleam,
Like wrecks of a dissolving dream.
A brighter Hellas rears its mountains
From waves serener far;
A,new Peneus rolls his fountains
Against the morning star;
Where fairer Tempes bloom, there sleep
Young Cyclads on a sunnier deep.
A loftier Argo cleaves the main,
Fraught with a later prize;
Another Orpheus sings again,
And loves, and weeps, and dies.
A new Ulysses leaves once more
Calypso for his native shore.
Oh, write no more the tale of Troy,
If earth Death's scroll must be!
Nor mix with Laian rage the joy
Which dawns upon the free:
Although a subtler Sphinx renew
Riddles of death Thebes never knew.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 35
Another Athens shall arise,
And to remoter time
Bequeath, like sunset to the skies,
The splendour of its prime;
And leave, ifnought so brightmay live,
All earth can take or Heaven can give.
Saturn and Love their long repose
Shall burst, more bright and good
Than all who fell, than Onewho rose,
Than many unsubdued:
Not gold, not blood, their altar dowers,
But votive tears and symbol flowers.
Oh, cease! must hate and death return ?
Cease! must men kill and die ?
Cease! drain not to its dregs the urn
Of bitter prophecy.
The world is weary of the past,
Oh, might it die or rest at last!
Shelley, even in the moment of writing these lines,
obviously hesitates between two conflicting ideals.
His ardent vision -embraces on the one hand the
moral regeneration of mankind, whereby the future
will be better than the past, and on the otherhand the
Stoic idea of a restitution of all things, whereby the
future becomes a mere repetition of the past and
must therefore bring with it all the old attendant
evils. The theory of recurrent cycles in the history
of the universe is incompatible with the conception
of unending progress; rather it rests ultimately upon
that of permanence and fixity, of destiny working by
the same laws under the same unalterable conditions
to all eternity, the consummation of a moral order
which is adapted to secure uninterruptedly the good
of the whole, but not necessarily that of its several
parts.
36 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
The monotony of life, the weary round ofhuman
existence, has been a favourite theme with moralists
of every age. In the weighty words of the Preacher:
"that which is hath been already; and that which is
to be hath already been: and God seeketh again that
which is passed away.
. . . That which hath been
is that which shall be; and that which hath been done
is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing
under the sun."
1
Butwe must be careful not to con-
fuse the daring speculation sketched above with such
generalities. Sombre reflections of this kind have,
for the most part, an ethical tendency; they correct
the eager anticipation ofyouth by an appeal to larger
experience, to a wider, though still limited, observa-
tion. The doctrine we have just considered is of far-
reaching cosmical import,transcending all experience.
How, it may be asked, did this singular conception
gain such a hold upon the Greeks ? It certainly did
not originate with the Stoics. A fragment of Eude-
mus attributes to the Pythagorean school the iden-
tical doctrine. "
If," says that contemporary and pu-
pil of Aristotle, "we are to believe the Pythagoreans,
numerically identical conditions will be repeated, and
I with this little rod in my hand shall some day once
again be addressing you my class sitting round me
precisely as you sit now, and everything else in like
manner will recur precisely as before."
2
But there
is no reason to father it upon the Pythagorean school.
More probably it is an inevitable corollary from the
Heraclitean doctrine of flux at least for those who
accept the latter in its entirety. That doctrine, which
1
Eccles. 3:15; 1:9.
2 Eudemus apud Simpl. In Phys., 732, 26. This interesting fragment
(Diels
2 Vors. Fr,, p. 277) is taken verbatim, Simplicius informs us, from
the third book of the Physics of Eudemus, cf. 732, 23 sqq.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 37
has already engaged our attention, postulates ever-
lasting change governed by an immutable law of
change. But, if we look at the conception more
closely, whether as presented by Heraclitus or the
Pythagoreans or the Stoics, the ancients, so far as
we can see, made no attempt to arrive at their con-
clusion by any logical process. It comes as an orac-
ular utterance; it would be unkind to call it a mere
guess. We should be inclined to doubt whether the
contemporaries of Heraclitus understood the scheme
of causality in nature as we understand it; most cer-
tainly they were unacquainted with the mathematical
notion ofprobability which a modern exponent ofthe
theory has employed in its support. Within the last
decade a posthumous work of that great but erratic
genius Friedrich Nietzsche
1
has again revived this
curious speculation. The doctrine there expounded
is known as "eternal recurrence," Die ewige Wieder-
kunft ; and one little passage which contains the gist
ofNietzsche's conception is here presented in a literal
translation by my friend, Mr. G. Ainslie Hight.
"If the world may be conceived as a definite mag-
nitude offorce, and a definite number offorce-centres
every other conception of it is wanting in definite-
ness, and therefore useless it follows that it has to
go through a calculable number of combinations in
the great game of chance2 of its existence. In the
eternity of time every possible combination would,
at some time or other, have been reached. More, it
would be reached an infinite number of times. And
since between each combination and its next return
every possible combination will have occurred, and
since each of these combinations determines the en-
1
Werke, Bd. XV. Der Wille zur Macht (Leipzig, 1901).
2 Lit. "game of dice." Heraclitus calls it a child's game of draughts.
38 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
tire sequence of combinations in that series, we must
assume a cycle (Kreislauf) of absolutely identical
series; the world as a cycle which has already re-
peated itself an infinite number of times and plays
its game ad infinitum."
*
Whether this amounts to
a demonstration and whether we must accept the
premisses on which the conclusions are based are
questions for the students and critics of Nietzsche
to determine. But there can be no reasonable doubt
of the identity of his conception with that of the
ancients. That which he set himself to prove had
been formulated by them long before, and, as the
fragment of Eudemus shows, in precise terms. Of
orthodox Stoicism it became a fundamental tenet,
defended, tooth and nail, against the rival Peripatetic
doctrine that the existing order of things as we know
it now is eternal. None but heterodox Stoics like
Panaetius ever expressed doubts on this head or were
seduced into accepting Aristotle's alternative hy-
pothesis.
Such then is the sketch which Stoicism affords of
the world's history. If all difficulties are not cleared
up, at any rate we understand from it why the lead-
ing terms, such as God, nature, matter, are applied
in what appears to be an inconsistent manner. God
is sometimes regarded as a spiritual power working
upon and in the material universe, and similarly
matter sometimes assumes an independent place
beside Him. Such language is appropriate to the
world already constituted, in which the active and
passive principles are set over against each other.
1 Der Wille mr Macht, Bk. IV, chap, r, 384, p. 410. The entire
exposition includes 37S~ 385. It is as sober and logical as anything
ever writtenby the author. The editor states in the preface (pp. xviii-xix)
that Nietzsche intended to treat the idea more fully in poetical form.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 39
Perhaps this is the more habitual attitude of Seneca,
Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius, our fullest authori-
ties, in ethical discussions or wherever Providence
and the moral order of the world come up for treat-
ment. At other times God is spoken ofas embracing
in Himself the totality of being, no longer identified
with the spiritual part of the world, but with the
world itself, embracing soul and body alike. From
this point of view the question, "What is God?"
is answered by the question, "What is God not?"
or by Lucan's line: "All that thou seest, yea, all
that moves is God."
1
From the one point of view physics passes over
into natural theology. Socrates had discoursed on
the wisdom and goodness of the gods and their
special care of men. Aristotle was the first to
demonstrate from his own premisses the being and
attributes of the deity whom he conceived as the
first cause and immobile mover of the physical
universe. The Stoics approached the subject with
a far stronger conviction of its importance and a
determination to carry to its legitimate consequences
the teleological conception of nature, which to a
Greater
or less extent was inherited by all the schools
eriving from Socrates. They undertook, not only to
prove that gods exist, but also to explain their nature.
But these inquiries were preliminary to their main
thesis that the universe and all its parts are ordered
and administered by divine Providence and that
all events subserve the highest end, the welfare and
advantage of rational beings. In taking up this
position they found themselves in direct hostility to
1
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quodcunque movetur, Pharsalia IX,
580. Cf. prope est a te Deus, tecum est, Intus est, Seneca, Epist. Mor.
41, ir Also Acts of the Apostles, XVII, 27, 1 Cor. Ill, 16, 17.
40 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Epicurus, who denied the interference of the gods
in the world of nature, and not less at variance with
the Peripatetics, who attributed the adaptation of
means to ends throughout the natural world to the
unconscious agency of an immanent power, without
explaining the relation in which this unconscious
power, nature, stood to the deity. To the popular
religion the Stoics were in reality as much opposed
as Aristotle or Epicurus. They denounced what
they called superstition, myths unworthy or immoral,
trivial or mischievous rites. Zeno declared images,
shrines, temples, sacrifices, prayers, and worship to
be of no avail. The best and holiest worship is to
reverence the gods with a mind and voice sincere
and free from the stain of guilt. A really acceptable
prayer can only come from a virtuous and devout
mind. At the same time it was their task to cherish
and foster all the elements of the orthodox faith
which could be pressed into the service of their sys-
tem. They took religion under their protection and
felt at liberty to defend and uphold the truth in
polytheism. The universe is God, the one supreme
Being,who may be addressed as Zeus. But, further,
divinity must be ascribed to his manifestations, the
heavenly bodies, sun, moon, and stars, the forces
of nature, the blessings and advantages of life, such
as corn and wine, the qualities which tend to the
welfare of the individual and society even to
deified men. When the world was thus peopled
with divine agents, it was necessary to turn to ac-
count myth and legend, especially the poems of
Homer and Hesiod, by extracting from them or read-
ing into them physical explanations and moral truths.
Thus some moral significance was discovered in
almost every incident in the career of the two favour-
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 41
ite heroes, Hercules and Ulysses. But the popular
religion had a strong hold on men's minds by means
of divination and oracles. To these the Stoics
lent the sanction of their system. But how, we may
ask, could this be reconciled with the doctrine
of natural necessity by which every event in the
physical universe has its fixed and predetermining
cause ? The reconciliation was effected by the re-
course to another doctrine of the mutual coherence
and interconnection between all the parts in the
whole universe. Omens and portents are thus
produced in sympathy with those events of which
they are precursors and indications, so that by natural
aptitude or acquired art the connection between
them may be empirically observed and noted. If
it were objected that divination was superfluous since
every event was unalterably fixed, the replywas that
both divination and our behaviour under the warn-
ings thus afforded were included in the chain of
causation.
In establishing the thesis that there is a moral
government of the world, the Stoics started from
all those phenomena which, in the judgment of
Socrates and the Socratics, especially Plato and
Aristotle, implied an intelligent adaptation of means
to ends. That there is an abundance of such phe-
nomena was a matter of general agreement, and on
this common ground Plato, Aristotle, and Zeno were
united in opposition to Epicurus and Carneades.
The teleological conceptions of the Stoics often sank
to a low level, and they inferred purpose from very
questionable premisses of supposed utility resulting
to mankind at large or to a few favoured individuals.
On the whole, however, their use of the physico-
theological argument, or argument from design,
42 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
did not greatly differ from that of their successors
on the same lines. Even Hume and Mill attributed
to it a certain degree of probability, and until Darwin
revolutionised biological science it was not seriously
shaken. The Stoics, however, were not content
with the conclusion to which Hume gave a halting
assent, that on the balance of probabilities the
world aswe know it does exhibit the work of intelli-
gence. They made the further assumption, which
Hume stoutly resisted, that purpose in nature is
working for the benefit of rational beings, /. ^., of
gods and men, to whose welfare that of the rest of
particular beings is subordinated. They held that
in this world, the common habitation of all living
things, everything had been ordained by perfect
reason for the general good; everything, therefore,
happens in the best way possible. This conclusion
was directly challenged as conflicting with actual
facts. It is at first sight a glaring contradiction
of the admitted existence of evil in the world.
Unlike their philosophic predecessors, Zeno and
Chrysippus could not attribute this evil to any
power or agency in the world external to the godhead;
they could not take refuge in chance or spontaneity
or necessity or intractable matter. In handling
this question they displayed the utmost acumen, and
it may be doubted whether any subsequent attempt
to justify the ways ofGod to man will ever be more
successful than theirs. With physical evils, such
as calamity,
.
disease, and pain, their task was com-
paratively easy, for these to them are not evils in
themselves; it is we who by our assent to a false
opinion make them so. In themselves they are
things indifferent which can be put to a right or a
wrong use and so turned to a blessing or a curse.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 43
Moreover, it was easy to show that advantages to
mankind at large resulted from some of them. Thus
disease and the like had a moral effect, partly as
deterrent or reformatory punishments, partly as a
stimulus for the exercise of our powers
. The
scourge of cholera may lead to the destruction of
slums and to improved sanitation; the sleeping-
sickness may result in fresh discoveries of medical
science. But, supposing all this to be granted, what
of folly, sin, and wickedness,' whose existence in the
world no Stoiccould denywhen hedivided allmankind
by a sharp line into wise and fools, sheep and goats ?
The first and weightiest reply to this objection
is drawn from the metaphysical distinction between
the whole and the parts. Epicurus inquired
whether it was because he could not or because
he would not that God refrained from banishing
evil from the world. The Stoic reply is in effect
that of the Hebrew prophet: God's thoughts are
not our thoughts, neither are our ways His ways.
He must by the necessity of His nature allow evil
and baseness among men. The Stoic emperor fre-
quently uses this argument when exhorting himself
to take a more tolerant and charitable view of his
fellow-men. This leads to the further inquiry: why
must evil be tolerated in the universe ? The answer
is that good and evil are relative. Destroy the one
and you also destroy the other. Only by opposition
to evil is good brought about: were there no sin or
folly, there would be no virtue and wisdom. Lastly,
|t was not difficult to follow up this train of thought
by pointing to actual instances in which good had
resulted from evil and deducing the conclusion that
God can overrule even evil and make it subservient
to His own ends.
44 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
The reader must not expect to find these sep-
arate lines of argument clearly distinguished in the
extant fragments of Chrysippus or in the writings of
the later Stoics. In the passages to which we now
draw his attention stress is laid first on one and then
on another of the considerations above adduced.
In all the extracts, however, the general intention is
to show why evil, whether physical imperfection or
moral defect, is not only consonant with, but actu-
ally indispensable to, the scheme of a rational uni-
verse under providential government (cur mala fiant,
cum sit providentia). To begin with Chrysippus,
whose doctrine is summed up in the pithy sentence,
"Vice cannot be removed, nor is it well that it should
be removed."
*
As Gellius informs us,
2
Chrysippus
in his fourth book on Providence dealt with the ob-
jection that ifthe world had been made and was now
governed in the interests of men, there would have
been no evils in it, and his answer was as follows:
"It is the height of absurdity to suppose that goods
could have existed without evils. For, since goods
are the contraries of evils, both must of necessity
coexist in mutual opposition; indeed, of any pair of
contraries neither can exist without the other. How
could justice be known apart from injustice ? What
is justice, in fact, but the negation pf injustice ?
Or how could courage be understood except by its
opposition to cowardice? Or temperance apart
from intemperance ? Or wisdom apart from folly ?
Nay, why do not these foolish people go on to wish
for truth to exist apart from falsehood ? Goods
and evils, good fortune and evil fortune, pain and
Plutarch, De Stoicorum Repugnantiis, 1051 B: Von Arnim, Stoic.
Vet. Fragm., No. 1182.
3 Noctes Attica, VII, i; Von Arnim, No. 1169.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 45
pleasure are just as inseparable from one another
as are truth and falsehood. For these are pairs,
in which each member is bound to the other with
opposing fronts, in Plato's phrase: ifyou take away
the one, you take away both."
In the same book Chrysippus went on to the
particular inquiry whether disease is natural to
man. He allows that it was not the primary
purpose of the Creator to create men subject to
disease. But in the production of much that was
serviceable and advantageous to mankind he could
not prevent the intrusion of kindred disadvantages
closely bound up with the advantages, and the
former stand to the latter as their natural con-
comitants. For instance, in the construction of
the human body considerations of reason and utility
required the head to be fashioned of very small
and thin bones. But this superior utility involved
a disadvantage, viz., that a head so constructed
is easily broken and exposed to risk from ever so
slight a blow. Hence disease and trouble date their
birth from the birth of health. Similarly it is na-
ture's design to produce virtue among mankind,
and vice sprang up in the same soil because vices are
related to the virtues as their contraries.
1 In the
second book on the gods, as we learn from Plutarch,
2
he laid down that discomforts, by which are meant
material evils, befall the good, not for punishment,
as in the case of the wicked, but by a different dis-
pensation as happens in states, and this is further
explained by the statement that evils are distributed
according to the rational will of Zeus, either for
punishment or by some other dispensation which
1 Nodes Attica, VII, i 7 sqq^ Von Arnim, No. 1169.
2 Z>e Stoic. Repug., 1050 E; Von Arnim, No. 1176,
46 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
has its importance to the universe at large. Again,
in a perfect universe there is nothing calling for
censure or blame; and yet Plutarch complains
l
that Chrysippus was sometimes disposed to attribute
the external misfortunes ofgood men to causes which
imply a reflection on the course of Providence, as
when he speculates whether such misfortunes are
due to oversight, on the analogy of the trifling acci-
dents due to neglect in a large household otherwise
well administered, or to the mismanagement of
evil spirits to whom has been intrusted a share in
the government of the universe. So in another con-
text he says: "Vice is determined in relation to the
rest of the accidents. For it also in some sort comes
into being according to the law of nature and is not,
so to say, wholly unprofitable to the universe at
large; for without it there would be no goodness."
2
And again, "As comedies have in them ludicrous
verses which, though bad in themselves, neverthe-
less lend a* certain grace to the whole play, so, while
in and for itself vice is to be blamed, it is not without
its utility for the rest." 3
Marcus Aurelius turns again and again to the
problem of evil. In the first of the following pas-
sages he is obviously alluding to the last citation
from Chrysippus.
"One and all we work toward one consumma-
tion; some knowingly and intelligently, others un-
consciously; even as Heraclitus, was it not, said of
those who sleep, that they too are at work, fellow-
workers in the conduct of the universe. One works
in one way, another in another; and not least he who
finds fault and who tries to resist and undo what is
1 De Stoic. Repug. t 1051 C; Von Anrim, No. 1178.
1
Plutarch, De Communibus Notitn$> 1065 B. 3
Ib., 1065 D.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 47
done. Even of such the world has need. It re-
mains then to make sure in which ranks you range
yourself; he who disposes all things will in any case
make good use of you, and will receive you into the
number of his fellow-workers and auxiliaries. Only
do not you play foil to the rest like the coarse jest
in the comedy, to use the figure ofChrysippus."
*
"Be the world atoms or be it nature's growth,
stand assured first, that I am a part of the whole,
at nature's disposition; secondly, that I am related
to all the parts of like kind with myself. First, then,
inasmuch as I am a part, I shall not be discontented
with any lot assigned to me from the whole; for
nothing is hurtful to the part which is good for the
whole. The whole contains nothing which is not
for its own good; this is true of all nature's growths,
with this addition in the case of the world-nature,
that there is no external cause compelling it to gener-
ate anything hurtful to itself. Thus in the thought
that I am a part of such a whole, I shall be content
with all that comes to pass. And, secondly, in so
far as I own my relation to the parts of like kind with
myself, I shall do nothing for self-seeking, but shall
feel concern for all such parts, directing every en-
deavour toward the common good, and diverting it
from the contrary. So long as I pursue this course,
life must perforce flow smooth, smooth as the ideal
life ofone everoccupied in thewell-being ofhis fellow-
citizens, and contented to accept whatever the city
assigns to him." 2
"He gives me the impression of wrong-doing, but
after all how do I know whether it is wrong? or
supposing it was, that he did not upbraid himself for
it like the mourner defacing his own visage? He
1
Marcus Aurelius To Himself, VI, 42-
2 *& X, 6.
48 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
who would not have the vile do wrong is like onewho
would not have the fig-tree bear juice in her figs, or
infants scream, or the horse neigh, or anything else
that is in the order of things. What else can result,
his bent being what it is ? If it aggrieves you,
amend it."
1
"That from such and such causes given effects
result is inevitable; he who would not have it so
would have the fig-tree yield no juice. Fret not.
Remember, too, that in a little you and he will both
be dead; soon not even your names will survive."
2
"Think of being shocked at the fig-tree bearing
figs! you have just as little right, remember, to be
shocked at the world bearing the produce proper
to it. Shame on the physician or the pilot who is
shocked at a case of fever or a contrary wind!"
3
"Evil-doing does not hurt the universe at large;
evil to one part does not hurt another. It is hurtful
to the evil-doer only, and release from it is within
his reach as soon as he so wills."
4
"To my moral will my neighbour's will is as com-
pletely unrelated as his breath is or his flesh. Be
we ever so much made for one another, our inner
selves have each their own sovereign rights: other-
wise my neighbour's evil might become my evil,
which is not God's good pleasure, lest another have
power to undo me."
5
^When some piece of shamelessness offends you,
ask yourself, Can the world go on without shameless
people? Certainly not! Then do not ask for the
impossible. Here, you see, is one of the shameless,
whom the world cannot get on without. Similarly,
in any case offoul play or breach of faith or any other
1
Marcus Aurelius To Himself, XII, 16. *
/&., IV, 6.
*
Ib., VIII, 15.
* Ib.} VIII, 55. Ib.t VIII, 56.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 49
wrong fall back on the same thought. When once
you remember that the genus cannot be abolished you
will be more charitable to the individual. Another
helpful plan is at once to realise what virtue nature
has given to man to cope with the wrong. For
she provides antidotes, such as gentleness to cope
with the graceless, and other salves for other irri-
tants. You can always try to convert the misguided;
for indeed every wrong-doer is really misguided and
missing his proper mark. Besides, what harm has
he done toyou ? For look noneofthe objectsofyour
ire has done anything that can inflict injury upon
your understanding; yet there, and there only, can
evil or hurt to you find realisation! What is there
wrong, pray, or shocking in the clown acting the
clown ? See that the fault does not lie rather at
your own door for not expecting him to go wrong
thus. Reason supplied you with faculties enabling
you to expect that he would go wrong thus; you for-
got, and then are surprised at his having done so.
When you complain ofsome breach of faith or grati-
tude, take heed first and foremost to yourself.
Obviously the fault lies with yourself, if you had
faith that a man of that disposition would keep
faith, or ifin doing a kindness you did not do it upon
principle, nor upon the assumption that the kind act
was to be its own reward. What more do you want
in return for a service done? Is it not enough to
have acted up to nature without asking wages for
it?"
1
Hence the attitude of resignation to and acqui-
escence in the course of events so characteristic of
Marcus Aurelius beyond all other Stoics. "All that
befalls the individual is for the good of the whole.
1 Marcus Aurelius To Himself, IX, 42.
50 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
That might suffice. But, looking closer, you will
perceive the general rule, that what is good for one
man is good for others, too. But 'good* or
'
in-
terest* must be regarded as wider in range than
things indifferent."
*
"We talk of doctors* orders and say: Jisculapius
has prescribed him horse exercise, or cold baths, or
walking barefoot. It is the same with nature's
orders, when she prescribes disease, mutilation,
amputation, or some other form of disablement.
Just as doctors' orders mean such and such treat-
ment, ordered as specific for such and such state of
health, so every individual has circumstances or-
dered for him specifically in the way of destiny.
Circumstances may be said to fit our case, just as
masons talk of fitting squared stones in bastions or
pyramids, when they adjust them so as to complete
a given whole. The adjustment is a perfect fit.
Just as the universe is the full sum of all the con-
stituent parts, so is destiny the cause and sum of all
existent causes. The most unphilosophical recog-
nise it in such phrases as
*
So it came to pass for
him.* So and so then was brought to pass, was
f
or-
dered* for the man. Let us accept such orders as
we do the orders of our j^Esculapius, They are
rough oftentimes, yet we welcome them in hope of
health. Try to think of the execution and con-
summation of nature's good pleasure as you do of
bodily good health. Welcome all that comes, per-
verse though it may seem, for it leads you to the goal,
the health of the world-order, the welfare and well-
being of Zeus. He would not bring this on the
individual were it not for the good of the whole.
Each change and chance that nature brings is in
1 Marcus Aurelius To Himself, VI, 45.
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 51
correspondencewith thatwhich exists by her disposal.
On two grounds, then, you should accept with ac-
quiescence whatever befalls first, because it hap-
pened to you, was ordered for you, affected you as
part of the web issuing from the primal causation;
secondly, because that which comes upon the indi-
vidual contributes to the welfare, the consummation,
yea, and the survival, of the power which disposes
all things. As with the parts so is it with the causes;
you cannot sever any fragment of the connected
unity without mutilating the perfection of the whole.
In every act of discontent, you inflict, so far as in
you lies, such severance and, so to say, undoing."
1
"Either all things spring from a single source
possessed of mind, and combine and fit together as
for a single body, and in that case the part has no
right to quarrel with the good of the whole: or else,
it is a concourse of atoms, a welter ending in disper-
sion. Why, then, perturb yourself?"
2
"When offended at a fault in some one else,
divert your thoughts to the reflection: What is the
parallel fault in me? Is it attachment to money?
or pleasure ? or reputation ? as the case may be.
Dwelling on this, anger forgets itself and makes way
for the thought 'He cannot help himself what
else can he do?* If it is not so, enable him, if you
can, to help himself."
3
"Claim your right to every word or action that
accords with nature. Do not be distracted by the
consequent criticism or talk, but, if a thing is good
to be done or said, do not disclaim your proper right.
Other men's minds are their own affair; they follow
their own impulse
: do not you heed them, but keep
the straight course, following your own nature and
1
Mar<m AW&WS To Bimself, V, 8. 2
76., IX, 39.
3
76.,X, 30.
52 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the nature of the universe, and the way of both is
one."
1
"Tenth and lastly a gift, so please you, from
Apollo, leader of the Choir. Not to expect the
worthless to do wrong is idiocy; it is asking an im-
possibility. To allow them to wrong others, and to
claim exemption for yourself, is graceless and ty-
rannical." 2 y
"Always be clear whose approbation it is youwish to secure and what their inner principles are.
Then you will not find fault with unintended blun-
ders; neither will you need credentials from them,when you look into the well-springs of their views
and impulses/*
3
" 'No soul/ says the philosopher,
4
'wilfully misses
truth'; no, nor justice either, nor wisdom, nor char-
ity, nor any other excellence. It is essential to re-
member this continually; it will make you gentlerwith every one/*
5
"The immortal gods do not lose patience at havingto bear age after age with the froward generationsof men, but still show for them all manner of con-
cern. Shall you, whose end is in a moment, lose
heart ? you, who are one of the froward ?" 6
"How is it that the gods, who ordered all thingswell and lovingly, overlooked this one thing: that
some men, elect in virtue, having kept close cove-
nant^ with the divine, and enjoyed intimate com-
munion therewith by holy acts and sacred minis-
tries, should not, when once dead, renew their being,but be utterly extinguished ? If it indeed be so, be
sure, had it been better otherwise, the gods would
1
Marcus Aurelius To Himself, V, 3. 2
jj xi 18, sub finem
8
Ib., VII, 62. *
Plato, as twice quoted by Epictetus, I, 28, 2 and 22!
* Marcus Aurelius, VII, 63. o /j yjj *a
EARLIER STOICS AND PANTHEISM 53
have had it so. Were it right it would be likewise
possible; were it according to nature, nature would
have brought it to pass. From its not being so, if
as a fact it is not so, be assured it ought not so to be.
Do you not see that in hazarding such questions you
arraign the justice ofGod ? Nay, we could not thus
reason with the gods but for their perfectness and
justice. And from this it follows that they would
never have allowed any unjust or unreasonable neg-
lect of parts of the great order,"
1
1
Marcus Aurilius To Himself, XII, 5.
CHAPTER II
STOIC PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY
In considering the body of Stoic doctrine due
weight must be attached to the pantheistic spirit
which, as we have seen, has its outcome in the view
of the universe as a rational whole. In the last re-
sort purely physical inquiries and ethical general-
isations tend to become merged in the problems
of natural theology. But in accordance with the
needs and ideas of the time the Stoics regarded
philosophy itself in the first instance as a practical
concern. Ifwisdom be the science of things human
and divine, philoso.phy or the pursuit of wisdom
should be defined as consisting in the exercise of a
serviceable art. The pre-eminently serviceable art is
the art of living. We study philosophy in order to
live and act. Conduct is the one thingofsupreme im-
portance. In a well-known passage of the Ethics,
Aristotle had exalted speculative over practical activ-
ity. Chrysippus objected that the life ofthe student,
when closely examined, turns out to be but one
more variety of hedonism. It is true, the student
leads a refined and leisurely existence, but it is a
life of pleasure all the same. The question always
recurs : To what use do we put our knowledge ?
Right conduct or moral excellence is, after all, the end,
and, in order to attain it, training and discipline are
needed even more than correct views. So complete
is the fusion of theory and practice with the Stoics
54
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 55
that logic, physics, and ethics, the three current
divisions of philosophy, are actually held to be the
three most comprehensive and universal virtues.
Each is a manifestation of wisdom, and wisdom is
only properly attained when it is realised in action
and life. We must exercise ourselves to form
right judgments and to choose proper objects of en-
deavour. In spite of this threefold division of philos-
ophy, wisdom is at all times and under all conditions
essentially one. The Stoics were fond of using illus-
trations which well bring out this unity. They com-
pared philosophy to an animal organism, logic being
the bones and sinews, ethics the flesh, physics the
soul. Or it may be likened to an egg, ofwhich logic
is the shell, ethics, the white, and physics the yolk.
Or, again, to a fertile field, or fruitful garden, logic
being the wall or fence, ethics the fruit or produce,
physics the soil or the trees. All definitions are con-
veniently summed up in the simple formula "The
rule of life and conduct." For such a rule of life
all the three divisions are equally indispensable.
The man must know his place in nature or else he
cannot adopt the proper attitude either to the uni-
verse at large or to his fellow-men. Hence the need
for physics and ethics. He is in a world of sense
and sensible things are incessantly craving his at-
tention. Moreover, he is a rational being capable
of judging; in fact, he must exercise his judgment
at every moment of hiswaking life,. Hence he needs
to have his faculties braced if he is to form right
judgments and make a right use ofthe data of sense.
This is thework oflogic.
Under the department of logic the Stoics in-
cluded a variety of studies, among them grammar
and rhetoric, poetry and music. The link of con-
56 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
nection is that they all have somehow to do with
thought and speech. Of this whole branch of philos-
ophy there were four main subdivisions. Dialectic
embraced what we now know as formal logic, rhet-
oric was made co-ordinate with dialectic, and there
followed two subsidiary inquiries, one into definition
and the other into the standard or test of truth.
Formal logic, z. <?., the doctrine of the notion, the
judgment, and the syllogism, had been systemat-
ically investigated by Aristotle, and the Stoics were
content to appropriate his results with some not
very important additions. Thus, besides categorical
judgments, Chrysippus treated hypothetical and dis-
junctive judgments with especial fulness and elabo-
rated the corresponding hypothetical and disjunctive
syllogisms. He declared the hypothetical syllogism
to be the normal type of reasoning, ofwhich the cate-
gorical syllogism is an abbreviation.
Again, the Stoics were dissatisfied with Aristotle's
table of ten categories or summa genera and at-
tempted to frame a new table of their own un-
der four heads, in which subordination and not
co-ordination was the guiding principle. These
are, roughly: (i) substance; (2) essential attribute,
called form or quality; (3) mode or accident; (4)
relation or relative mode. If we think of some-
thing, it must be something which exists. The
most universal and all-comprehensive general term
for such an existent thing, and at the same time
the most indeterminate, is Being or Something.
Again, when we differentiate the particular some-
thing we are thinking of and determine it more
closely, we recognise it as the substratum of certain
essential attributes. These, according to the Stoic
view, are forms or qualities which, in themselves
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 57
corporeal, permeate and pervade its entire sub-
stance or matter. This gives the second category,
less universal and more determinate than the first,
since the various existent things have various quali-
ties and are determined by various and mutually
exclusive forms. Next, a further determination
ensues when we take into account the unessential
or accidental attributes, which distinguish particular
things belonging to the same class and exhibiting
the same forms or qualities. Again, as some ofthese
depend upon the relation of one thing to another, in
such cases a fourth category must be added.
Here seems an appropriate place to remark that
the Stoics were the first to grasp and formulate the
principle of individuality, as it is called (principium
individuationis}, which has since played no small part
in the history of thought. No two particular things,
they maintain, are entirely and in all respects similar,
no two hairs of the head, no two leaves of the forest
exactly reproduce each other. Each and every ex-
istent particular is absolutely unique. But a full de-
scription will always specify that it is (i) a thing, (2)
ofa certain quality, (3) modified in a certain way, (4)
in a certain relation to something else. In comparing
with the Aristotelian table the main point to seize is
that the second, third, and fourth categories imply
the first, the third, and fourth, the second and the
fourth all the rest.
Of the other contributions to formal logic made
by the Stoics, as indeed of many similar im-
provements upon Aristotle, it may be said that
they were for the most part of no great value or
were even pedantic and useless. But there is one im-
portant point which, though properly psychological,
requires to be cleared up in advance and may claim
58 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
our immediate attention. In what light was the
subject-matter, with which this whole branch of
logic deals, regarded by the Stoics ? What precisely,
in their view, is the content of notions, judgments,
and syllogisms ? Not external things, not spoken
words, nor, again, processes of thought so far as
they are modes of the mind itself. Three things may
be distinguished: (i) the external thingwhich a word
symbolises, of which a word is the name, e. ., the
really existent moon; (2) the spoken word "moon";
(3) that ofwhich the spoken word is significant. To
us the word "moon" calls up something, because we
know its meaning, while to a savage totally ignorant
of the language, even if he hears the spoken word, it
either has no meaning or calls up something dif-
ferent. It is this last with which logic deals, ac-
cording to the Stoics, and which they designate
Lekton. They held that the first and second, the
external object and the spoken word, are corporeal,
but that the last, the meaning of the word, was in-
corporeal. If this meaning had been identical with
the external object or with the processes of thinking,
recollecting, or conceiving the external object, it
would, according to them, have been corporeal and
therefore real. But here they were bound to make
an exception and recognise something incorporeal,
something fictitious, interpolated as it were, between
language and thought, between the objective spoken
word and the equally objective modification of cor-
poreal mind. Here is a strange inconsistency in a
system avowedly materialistic, and it naturally pro-
voked a shower of objections, taunts, and reproaches
from adversaries belonging to different schools.
The meaning of a term, then, the subjective idea
which it excites, is incorporeal, and so are all the
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 59
judgments in which it plays a part and all the logical
constructions obtained by combining these judg-
ments in inference. This anomalous position is not
assigned to Lekton alone; it is shared by space,
whether full or empty, and by time. Space, time, and
the subjective idea or meaning of terms, according
to the Stoics, have no counterparts in objective
reality. Let Seneca explain. "There are corporeal
things, such as this man, this horse. Next follow
movements ofthought conveyingan assertion respect-
ing bodies. These movements of thought have a
sort of content peculiar to themselves and incorpo-
real. For instance, I see Cato walking. Sense has
shown this; my mind has believed it. That which
I see, that to which I have directed my eyes and my
mind is a body. Thereupon I say: 'Cato is walk-
ing/ The thought which I express in these words is
not corporeal, but by it an assertion is made respect-
ing body, and some call it a judgment, others an
assertion, others a predication."
1
Plato had already distinguished between the
thought or meaning and the words or language
in which the thought is clothed, between judgment
and proposition. The judgment is an unspoken
proposition, the proposition a judgment expressed
in words. How was this distinction to be retained
in a system which allowed reality to corporeal things
alone ? There are none such corresponding to
general terms: and yet there are general terms and
general propositions. Moreover, even a particular
judgment, "Cato walks," is distinct from the per-
ception which gives rise to it. The percept is pre-
sented to sense, the concept or judgment to intellect,
and the concept is the counterpart of the percept.
1
Epist. Mor., 117, 13.
60 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
It is held by the Stoics to be a mental fiction, an
unreal addition, as it were, a reflection or duplica-
tion of reality; whereas the act of perceiving, the
act of judging they regard as activities or modes
of the corporeal mind.
In dealing with the problems of psychology the
Stoics and Epicureans stand on common ground.
Both agree that whatever appears to have indepen-
dent existence as spirit can be resolved into a mode or
function of matter, which is the sole ultimate reality.
Theymust be prepared, then, to combat the opposing
arguments of idealism and in particular to explain
whatmode ofexistence they assign to mental phenom-
ena. When Plato in the Sophist asked: "Do you
pronounce that qualities like virtue and justice and
the soul in which they inhere are corporeal or in-
corporeal?" the answer which he anticipated from
the materialists of his own time, viz., that the soul
was a corporeal thing, was precisely the answer
subsequently given by Stoics and Epicureans alike.
Both schools argued that, unless the jx>ul_ were
corporeal* it coidd^neither actjor ^^^cte^j^p^^and both held that mental qualities wereThereditary
and must therefore be connected wiffi^'a^^rjpSi^al^
substratum; while in the passage in question PlatoT
admitspfKat capacity to act and be acted upon is a
valid test of real existence. The soul, then, accord-
ing to the Stoics, is
j^^rpor^i^^^^^^^fj^i-
pur,e$tg^ji*
It may be more
exactly 3^^^ (Pneuma)
distinctive
mental phenomena were
referred to the fact that t^s
e ^uipan soul
*^
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 61
The later Stoics sometimes describe this divine
element within the man, this particula divince aura,
as his dggnion or genius. The relation between the
soul of the wKoIe%ticfthe soul of the part, or, in other
words, the divine origin of the human soul, is plainly
recognised in the hymn of Cleanthes. Soul is the
unifying principle which holds the organic body
together. It is diffused all over the body, since
sensation can be localised at any point of the pe-
riphery.
The conception of soul as something corporeal
present in the organism was nothing new in Greek
philosophy, and in ignoring the difficulties inherent
in such a theory the Stoics were at one with their
predecessors, the hylozoists, and with almost all
their contemporaries. Here also a comparison be-
tween the macrocosm and the microcosm had free
play. As the soul of the universe, or universal soul,
is one, so also the unity of the human soul is the
fundamental tenet of the Stoic psychology and the
key to many of its problems. The doctrine of inter-
penetration was used to explain the diffusion of
soul all over the frame. This diffusionwas rendered
compatible with the essential unity of the soul by
means of the favourite assumption of breath-cur-
rents. The heart is the seat ofdie central or govern-
ing part of soul (Hegemonikon), which for our pur-
pose it will be best to designate the mind. The
blood-vessels start from the heart, from the breast
come the voice and the breath. The five senses,
with the faculties of speech and propagation, are
merely channels of communication, breath-currents,
which connect the centre with various points of the
circumference. Parts of this theory bear a strong
family re$emblance to the views of Strato the Peripa-
62 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
tetic. The sense-impressions, he said, are conveyed
by currents from the periphery to the central organ.
It is in the central organ that an affection of sense
is transformed into a sensation of the subject. The
central organ of soul, however, was located by
Strato, not in the heart, but in the brain. Herein
he agreed with Alcmaeon and partly with Plato,
while the Stoics reverted to Aristotle, who located
it in the heart. The sense-organs, according to
Strato, have no more than a capacity for receiving
and transmitting impressions. So, too, the Stoics
held that, when sensation takes place, the currents
connecting the peripheral sense-organ with the
central organ play the part of a mechanism for
keeping up communications. They may be com-
pared to the arms or tentacles of a polypus. It is
with the central organ alone that we are conscious.
The Stoics, then, agree with most materialists
in considering the phenomena of mental life to be
functions of organic matter, and in assimilating
them to those ordinary cases of physical action and
reaction between external bodies which are usually
held, so far as our present knowledge goes, to be
unattended by consciousness. The soul cannot be
broken up into different parts or faculties. There
is no such distinction as Aristotle made between
intellect and the rest of soul, which would justify us
in calling the latter irrational. Even the irrational
soul of animals must be credited with perception
and desire. Man is parted from the brutes by the
possession of that which is variously termed reason,
thought, or intellect. Under this all other functions
of a human soul must be subsumed, as also that vital
principle which man shares with the irrational brute.
For it may be said that the same force, which in the
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 63
centre of the soul is reason, is present throughout
the organism, though it appears merely as a principle
of coherence in bones and sinews, as a principle of
growth in hair and nails. The operations of the
distinctively human soul may be classified under the
heads of sensation, presentation, assent, desire,
thought. All alike have their seat in the central or
governing part of soul, the mind, which is the cor-
poreal substratum to which they must all be re-
ferred. Take the case of external perception.
When the bodily organ, the eye or ear, is affected by
an external object either by direct contact or through
a medium, that object, in the view of the Stoics, is
presented to the mind. "Presentation" is a fair
equivalent for the Stoic term, which Cicero renders
by visum. The more literal translation, "appear-
ance," would be misleading, in so far as it suggests
an erroneous contrast with reality. Objects, then,
are presented to the mind through the senses. But
not all presentations are of this kind. There are
rational presentations, such as those of moral and
aesthetic general notions, of space and time and, as
explained above, of the abstract content of thought
or the meaning ofterms. With all ofthese the mind
or reason is conversant, but they are not, as such,
revealed by sense, /. <?., as good and evil, as beautiful
and ugly, as space or time or Lekton.
The relation of the other "parts" of soul rec-
ognised by the Stoics to the whole soul and to the
governing part has given rise to some controversy.
On the whole itseems probable that the term "part"
is misleading. It is better to speak of diverse func-
tions than ofdiverse parts, for clearly the seven diverse
parts have no independent psychical function of their
own; on the contrary, the eighth or governing part
64 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
is active in them. The comparison to the arms of a
polypus must be ta*ken to convey that the other seven
are branches or ramifications of the central or gov-
erning part and make up with it a single whole.
They are, in fact, nothing but its peculiar function?
attached to some definite organ. Since force and
matter are inseparable, there can be no opposition
between function and substance. Wherever there
is a function of soul, there must be the substance
or substratum of soul as well. The assumption of
parts is only needed to explain the various effects
of soul upon the body and its organs. Even when
these parts are described as breath-currents con-
necting the peripheral sense-organs with the centre
of soul, this description is qualified by ascribing to
such currents intelligence or consciousness. The
main fact is that the human soul, like the world-soul,
is active. It thinks, perceives, desires, and wills
in virtue of the same living force. Thus difference
of function rests on and implies essential identity.
Since, as we have seen, all processes in the soul
are functions of the governing part, the Stoics recog-
nised only one faculty, the rational faculty. From
Socrates they inherited the intellectualism which
converted all mental processes into, or interpreted
them as, opinions or judgments. It may also be
pointed out that this denial of different faculties
tended to confuse different functions. The bar-
riers between judgment and will, between what is
rational andwhat is irrational, seemed to break down,
when every operation of the human soul was pro-
nounced rational. Feeling was merged in knowing,
and under the elastic term assent or approval were
combined sense-perception, intellectual judgment,
and volition. The fault usually alleged against
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 65
Aristotle's psychology is that he views the soul as
a bundle of distinct faculties, an incongruous assort-
ment held together by a purely external tie. A
superficial reading of his treatise favours this as-
sumption, though he himself is sometimes most
anxious to guard against it. The Stoics, whose
dependence upon Aristotle is direct and obvious, es-
caped this error only to rush to the opposite ex-
treme. In the endeavour to unify all phases ofmental
life the intellectual factor was their starting-point.
The mind is active when it judges, and ifjudgment
be interpreted as assent to a proposition, such an
act of assent forms a link uniting sensation and per-
ception to desire and will. He who perceives im-
plicitly assents to the perception as true; he who de-
sires implicitly assents to the proposition that the
thing desired is good. The presentation of an ob-
ject is the part-cause, in the one case of perception,
in the other case of impulse or desire. The mind
has free play for its activity in giving or withholding
its assent to such presentation. All mental states,
then, however similar, agree in this, that they are
reactions ofthe individual subjectwhen he is affected
by an external object. The presence of the object
gives rise to the presentation, and I become aware of
it. My taking note of it is assent or affirmation
of the form "This is A." Further, it is impos-
sible to be aware of the object without taking up
a certain attitude toward it, and from this point
ofview every phase ofconation and emotion, whether
desire, will, or purpose, love or hate or fear, is but
another interpretation of the judgment "This is A."
Movement of soul toward (or away from) the ob-
ject is the general definition applied by the Stoics to
all the conative or emotional states, which they
66 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
crudely collected under the term impulse (Horme;
Latin: Cicero, appetitus; Seneca, impetus).
On this psychological basis rests the Stoic theory
of knowledge. The current belief is that the Stoics
derived all knowledge from sensation, but this re-
quires very careful qualification before it can be en-
dorsed. The mind of a man at birth, we are told,
is a tabula rasa, a blank tablet, on which he records
each successive idea or notion. The first written
characters come through the senses; past sensations
are retained by memory and, when accumulated,
constitute experience. From single sensations of
particular things or particular qualities arise general
notions, which fall into two great divisions. The
first are known as preconceptions or intuitions, such
as that of God or those of good and evil. They
arise naturally and spontaneously in much the same
way in all men. The second class are methodically
and artificially framed and depend upon instruction.
Such are the notions which a student acquires when
he learns any particular art or science, such as paint-
ing or astronomy. Reason, in virtue of which men
are called rational beings, is developed out of these
notions. Chrysippus defined reason as a store of
preconceptions and notions. Different accounts are
given as to the exact period when reason is developed.
Whether the accumulation began with the seventh
year or the fourteenth, it must have been a gradual
process. The point to decide is how we come by
preconceptions. Our authorities furnish particular
information as to various ways in which notions are
formed by abstraction and generalisation. Some
are manufactured out of the facts of experience by
comparing and combining the materials of sense,
others by analogy, transposition,and contrast, others,
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 67
again, by privation and by transcending experience.
Instances are the notion of Socrates formed from his
picture, of a centaur from the separate notions of
horse and rider, of the earth's centre from those of
small spheres, of death by contrast with life, and
so on; lastly, there is the notion of the incorporeal,
which transcends experience. The empirical origin
of most of these notions is quite evident, but not
of all; and this does not conflict with the statement
that the earliest records inscribed on the tabula rasa
come through the senses. But, as sense-material
is accumulated, there is also a corresponding de-
velopment of reason, and there is no ground for dis-
believing the plain statement that the origin of some
notions is to be sought in reason itself. This will
become clearer if we consider the class of precon-
ceptions, the distinctive possession of rational beings,
and therefore widely, if not universally, distributed
among mankind. To these preconceptions the Stoics
appealed in their favourite argument from universal
assent, from instinctive beliefs and intuitions uncon-
fined to any age or country. They are general notions,
but a special class of general notions. The standing
instances are the practical ideas, the just, the good, the
beautiful. They are said, as we have seen, to arise
naturally and spontaneously in all men, which im-
plies that no special training or instruction is neces-
sary for their acquisition, but does not exclude the
possibility that reason and experience are needed to
render them explicit and precise.
Such a preconception, then, differs from the in-
nate idea, in the sense in which Locke used the term,
for it is certainly not knowledge ready-made, but
only the germs out of which knowledge grows up.
For some species of knowledge, for moral truth, in
68 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
particular, we are favourably disposed by nature.
While most empirical general notions are painfully
collected and require skill in comparison, others sug-
gest themselves in the absence of methodical investi-
gation. Even children can form them; they are the
same everywhere. The vague inkling which by na-
ture we have of good and evil, is subsequently veri-
fied by experience and strengthened by the exercise
of reason. Epictetus certainly affirms that all men
by nature have elementary moral notions. For
example, their notion of good is that it is beneficial,
of evil that it is hurtful. They use these terms in a
definite sense, even when they do not understand
their full import and content. Epictetus makes
this the starting-point of his discourse. It is the
task of man, he maintains, by reflection to work out
and elaborate these vague preconceptions and make
them articulate and distinct, in order that these
moral notions may be applied as the standard by
which to judge the things of actual experience. By
such steps, for example, from the vague concep-
tion of evil as something to be avoided and of that
which is necessary as something which cannot be
avoided,we are led to the conclusion that death is no
evil. When this clarified and articulate notion is
applied to actual things, we come to have synthetic
knowledge and to estimate outward things by their
moral worth. But not every one who has the vague
notion of evil has developed it so far as to realise
that death is no evil. Indeed, this could hardly be
done without the aid of philosophy and that develop-
ment of reason which it insures. Moreover, if good
and evil were empirical notions derived wholly from
experience, men would not differ so widely in the
application of these notions to things, i. e., in their
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 69
moral judgments. As it is, since the things them-
selves tell us nothing of their value for us, there is
room for divergence and conflict. Experience prac-
tically never shows us the ideal of virtue.
But to return to sensible experience. Through
the sense-organs the mind has contact, directly
or indirectly, with external objects. The reaction
technically known as the presentation, visum, of an
object was defined as an impression in the soul or in
the governing part of the soul, and compared by
Cleanthes to the imprint of a seal reproducing
faithfully protuberances and depressions in the wax.
Chrysippus substituted the term "alteration" for
"impression/
5
The rejection of the crude com-
parison does not affect the attitude of the soul,
which remains more passive than active. For an
act of perception many things are required. The
presence of the object and the possession of sound
senses do not depend upon the percipient, but he
on his part must direct his attention to the object
and observe it ifhe would escape from hallucination.
For the evidence of the senses is not always to be
trusted, and it lies in his power by an act ofjudgment
or decision to accept as true a presentation of sense
or to reject it as false or even in doubtful cases to
withhold judgment. In the process of assent the
mind's activity is evident. If we assent to a true
presentation, the result is simple apprehension; if
to a false or unconvincing presentation, the result
is opinion, a mental state which is always disparaged
as akin to error and ignorance unworthy of the
sage.
There remains the practical question, How is the
percipient to be sure which of his presentations
are true, affording him the means of knowing real
70 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
external objects, and how are they to bedistinguished
from untrustworthy presentations, which are before
his mind when he makes a mistake or is subject to
hallucination or madness ? This inquiry, so im-
portant to all schools after the time of Aristotle,
is generally described as the inquiry for a criterion
of truth, a standard of knowledge. Our authorities
report that the older Stoics made right reason
(Logos) the standard, that Chrysippus interpreted
this by declaring sensation and preconception to be
the twofold test or criterion of truth, while the school
in general, especially the later Stoics, ultimately
settled on a particular character of certain presenta-
tions as affording a valid test of truth and guarantee
of reality. Such a presentation was technically
known as the "apprehending" presentation. It was
recognised that none but true presentations have
this particular apprehensive character, though it does
not follow that it is possessed by all true presenta-
tions, for an opinion may be correct and yet not
certain to its possessor. When -we compare these
three answers: (i) right reason, (2) sensation and
preconception, (3) a particular kind of presentation,
it is important to remember that the question what
is the criterion is ambiguous. It may mean (i) who
distinguishes, (2) what means does he use to dis-
tinguish, or (3) bywhat sign does he distinguish truth
from error ? In an inquiry for the standard of truth
we are certainly askingbywhom is truth distinguished
from error, and it would be an adequate answer to
say, "By the sage, in so far as he possesses right
reason." But we may want to know more precisely
what means does he use, what function is he exer-
cising when he so distinguishes. The answer of
Chrysippus is here to the point, viz., that this is done
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 71
by sensation and preconception, the one being his
guide for sensible things, the other for moral and
aesthetic ideas. Even this is not enough. We go on
to inquire, How does the sage apply this twofold
criterion to any particular case in order to dis-
tinguish truth from error ? His procedure is exactly
like that of the carpenter when he applies his rule
to a surface in order to measure it, or like that of
one who employs a balance to determine weight.
He brings his faculties to bear upon the object, and,
provided his sense-organs are normal and healthy,
provided a real external object be present, the result
is a presentation of the particular kind known as
apprehending. He has then an immediate certainty
of conviction that he is apprehending a real object
through its real qualities. His immediate certainty
is the subjective counterpart ofobjective reality.
The precise force of the adjective "apprehen-
sive" as applied to a presentation has given rise
to some uncertainty. Etymologically it ought to
be active in meaning, although the corresponding
negative adjective is apparently not active but pas-
sive in form, as if the Stoics divided presentations
into those which can apprehend and those which
cannot be apprehended. It has been supposed that
the adjective
"
apprehensive," at least upon occasion,
was taken in a passive sense or was purposely ren-
dered ambiguous and taken in a sense partly active,
partly passive. This I now believe to be an un-
founded assumption. Through the presentation
the mind of the percipient apprehends the real
qualities of the real object. The fact that a similar
word is used to describe the irresistible force of
conviction engendered by such a presentation,
which, in the words of Sextus, "seizes upon the sub-
72 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
ject, as it were, by the hair and extorts his assent/'
is a mere coincidence and nothing to the point.
Again, the feeble and unreal presentations of mere
opinion or hallucination are sometimes called, not
inapprehensive, but inapprehensible as Cicero ex-
presses it, visa quce comprehend! non possunt. For
presentation is here interchanged with object pre-
sented; when I experience a feeble or false presen-
tation the external thing objectively presented, the
content of the presentation, is apprehended by me
either imperfectly or not at all.
To proceed. The presentation thus obtained,
immediately certain because faithfully reproducing
a real object, has an important part assigned to it in
the development ofknowledge. All empirical science
is merely a system of apprehensions of this kind
strung together and closely connected; and similarly
in the world of moral and aesthetic ideas, we start
each with the same presentments, whether of the
good, the beautiful, or of God, and all ethics is but
a system by which they are linked together and
further developed, the discursive reason being the
great instrument by which they are manipulated
and extended. But the systems of science and
morality, however vast they grow, are after all but
accretions built up and developed from single isolated
cells or atoms of certainty, each a separate, irref-
ragable presentation, whether to sense or to reason,
and capable ofverification at every step by experience.
The relation between the elementary constituents
and the perfected whole or system Zeno sought to
make clear by his celebrated simile. We follow
Cicero's version of the story: "Showing his hand
open to view with the fingers stretched out, 'pres-
entation/ said Zeno, *is like this/ Then, closing
PSYCHOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 73
his fingers slightly, 'assent is like this/ Next, when
he had entirely pressed his fingers together and
clinched his fist, he declared this position to re-
semble the act of mental apprehension. Again,
when he had brought up his left hand and had en-
closed the other fist in its tight and powerful grasp,
that position he declared to resemble knowledge or
science."
x
1
Acad. Pr., II, 145.
CHAPTER III
MORAL IDEALISM
The two preceding chapters have made clear the
practical tendency of the Stoic system. Logic, psy-
chology, and physics indeed, the whole of science,
the entire theory ofman and the universe, serve as a
basis for morals. The outcome of all study is a
rational life, a virtuous life, a happy and successful
life, which to the Stoic are but different names for
one and the same thing. Even the study of ethics
deserves consideration only so far as it promotes
this life. But first a word upon the form taken by
ethical inquiries. To us the Tightness or wrongness
of conduct is its fundamental attribute. A right
action is an action which ought to be performed,
where the notion expressed by
'
ought
*
is too ele-
mentary for definition. But this is not the way in
which the Greeks approached the subject. They
raised the more comprehensive question, What is
the good ? By right actions they meant those which
lead to the attainment of the good. Reflection and
discussion revealed a hopeless diversity of opinion as
to what the good really was. Some identified it with
pleasure, some with interest or utility; some allowed
a variety of goods, mental, bodily, and external,
others argued that from its very nature there could
only be a single supreme good. The antithesis be-
tween what we now call moral and material good
was only gradually developed. No Greek denied
74
MORAL IDEALISM 75
that judgments of praise and blame attached to
specific actions or, in other words, that virtue was a
good, vice an evil. The disagreement arose when
the attempt was made to assign virtue its place in
relation to the other things ordinarily recognised as
good, such as pleasure, knowledge, health, or even
external advantages like wealth, fame, and honour.
All these things were conceived to exert an attraction
upon the individual and to invite pursuit. The choice
of an end of course regulated the means for its at-
tainment: success or failure afforded an empirical
test of the Tightness or wrongness of conduct relative
to the ulterior end pursued. All Greek ethical
systems appear to us more or less prudential, self-
regarding, or, as it is sometimes expressed, eudaemo-
nistic. Socrates declared that he had never heard of
a good which was not good for some one, and when
the main problems of ethics take the form of asking
what things are good in themselves and what con-
duct is the rightmeans togood results,we are tempted,
however unfairly, to interpret good as good for me,
ignoring the fact that the inquirer is seeking a rule
ofobjective validity and universal application.
For convenience of instruction the Stoics treated of
scientific ethics under six heads :
(i) impulse natural
and rational, (2) the end of action, (3) virtue, (4)
the classification of things as good, evil, and morally
indifferent, (5) a similar classification of actions, and
(6) emotion. Ofthesesections the firstand last largely
consist of psychological inquiries. The distinctive
points in their ethics, upon which they were involved
in controversy with other schools, concerned the
determination of the end and the relation to virtue
of those external things which ordinary men reckon
among goods. To understand this controversy, how-
76 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
ever, we must revert to the fundamental points of
doctrine already established, particularly the relation
of man as a rational being to the universe. If the
universe is essentially rational, then the good is
perfectly realised in it, and in this realisation all
rational beings, as citizens of the one city of Zeus,
co-operate, for reason is the common tie which binds
all its members in the closest association, and the
course of the world is regulated by a law of inner
causality, working always and everywhere for the
best. This is a necessary conclusion, if we fix our
gaze upon the whole universe, and the hymn of
Cleanthes, as we have seen, has given it adequate
expression. Let us now turn from the whole uni-
verse to its parts and consider the individual man.
He is a part, but a rational part. He stands, then,
in a certain relation to this organic whole and to other
similar parts of it. His attitude is determined by
the knowledge of these relations. As a part, he is
subordinate and, like all parts, he must obey the
universal law, which by the reason within him bids
him do certain things and refrain from others. In
this way Epictetus declares that the highest aim
is to follow God and please Him, to live in His ser-
vice and obey His commands. The same thought
appears in a poetical fragment
x
of Cleanthes, which
may be thus rendered :
Lead me, O Zeus, lead Thou me, Destiny,
By whatsoever path ye have ordained.
I will not flinch; but if, to evil prone,
My will rebelled, I needs must follow still.
With this may be compared the words of Seneca:
"Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem trahunt."
2
Resig-
1
Fragment 91, p. 313, Pearson. a
Seneca, Epistles, 107, 10.
MORAL IDEALISM 77
nation to the course of destiny, submission to the
divinely appointed order of the world is the proper
attitude for man. This would be an exact definition
of the ethical end as conceived by Cleanthes. There
is but one way to happiness and freedom, and that
is to will nothing but what is in the nature of things,
nothing that will not be realised independently of
us. In this way success is insured beforehand.
Our wishes cannot be balked or disappointed. Our
rational freedom is a willing co-operation with des-
tiny, instead of a reluctant submission under com-
pulsion. Chrysippus, by the express testimony of
his critic Plutarch, whenever he laid down any moral
precept, started with a long preamble about Zeus,
Destiny, and Providence, in conformity with his
general principle that all ethical inquiries must
start with considering the universal order and ar-
rangement of the world.
1
Let us proceed to the line of argument by which
the Stoics sought to justify their conclusions. They
had somehow to arrive at virtue starting either from
nature or from reason. They required to prove
that moral good or virtue is the natural object of a
rational man's desire and pursuit. The all-em-
bracing end which is never a means they found in
life itself, a life consistent and harmonious, the
smooth flow of existence unchecked by eddies and
cross-currents. Of such a life activity and energy,
not feeling or emotion, are the constituent elements.
To live such a life the individual man must be in
harmony with himself and with reason, that reason
which is his own individual nature and at the same
time the nature of the whole universe. In the form-
ula "Follow nature," the word 'nature
3
may mean
1 De Stoicorum Repugnantiis, c. 9,
78 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the nature of the universe or our human nature, but
since we are organic parts of the universe, the two
interpretations come in the end to the same thing.
We must be guided by experience of the course of
nature. This formula points in two directions: (i) to
submission to the divine will, the course of Provi-
dence, the inevitable, and (2) to the perfecting and
full development ofthe divine within us, the guardian
genius or daemon, our human reason, intelligence, and
mind. But this development is a process in time.
Man is born into the world a non-moral being, and
though he has natural, uncorrupted impulses, he is
not much better off during his helpless minority than
the brutes. The primary impulse in the human
infant, as in the brute, is toward self-preservation.
Let us quote the words of Diogenes Laertius,
1
whose
summary of Stoic ethics is on this point universally
held in the main to follow Chrysippus:
"The first instinct which the animal has is the
impulse to self-preservation with which nature en-
dows it at the outset. The first possession which
every animal acquires is its own organic unity and
the perception thereof. If this were not so, nature
must either have estranged from itself the creature
which she has made or left it utterly indifferent to
itself, neither of which assumptions is tenable.
The only alternative is that she should have designed
the creature to love itself. For in this way it repels
what harms it and welcomes what benefits it. It
is not true, as some say, that the first instinct of ani-
mals is toward pleasure. For pleasure, if it is an
end at all, is a concomitant of later growth which
follows when the nature of the animal in and by
itself has sought and found what is appropriate to it,
1
Piogenes Laertius, VII, 85.
MORAL IDEALISM 79
Under like circumstances animals sport and gambol
and plants grow luxuriant. Nature has made no
absolute severance between plants and animals: in
her contrivance of plants she leaves out impulse and
sensation, while certain processes go on in us as they
do in plants. But when animals have been further
endowed with instinct, bywhose aid they go in search
of the things which benefit them, then to be governed
by nature means for them to be governed by instinct.
When rational animals are endowed with reason, in
token of more complete superiority, in them life in
accordance with nature is rightly understood to
mean life in accordance with reason. For reason
is like a craftsman shaping impulse and desire.
Hence Zeno's definition of the end is to live in con-
formity with nature, which means to live a life of
virtue, since it is to virtue that nature leads. On
the other hand, a virtuous life is a life which con-
forms to our experience of the course of nature, our
human natures being but parts of universal nature.
Thus the end is a life which follows nature, whereby
is meant not only our own nature, but the nature of
the universe, a life wherein we do nothing that is
forbidden by the universal law, i. e.9 by right reason,
which pervades all things and is identical with Zeus,
the guide and governor of the universe. The virtue
ofthe happyman, his even flow oflife, is realised only
when in all the actions he does his individual genius
is in harmony with the will of the ruler of the uni-
verse. Virtue is a disposition conformable to reason,
desirable in and for itself and not because of any
hope or fear or any external motive. And well-
being depends on virtue, on virtue alone, since the
virtuous soul is adapted to secure harmony in the
whole of life. When reason in the animal is per-
80 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
verted, this is due to one of two causes, either to the
persuasive force of external things or to the bad in-
struction of those surrounding it. The instincts
which nature implants are unperverted."
The unknown Stoic whom Cicero follows puts the
matter thus: "
Immediately upon its birth a sentient
creature is attracted to its own being and is impelled
to maintain its own existence and to feel affection
for its own constitution and for all that tends to main-
tain that constitution, while it recoils from death and
from all that seems to induce death. One considera-
tion is sufficient to prove this. Children, before
pain or pleasure has touched them, crave for what
is wholesome and refuse what is hurtful; this would
not be so unless they felt affection for their own
constitution and shrank from death. They could
by no means yearn after anything, unless they had
consciousness of their own personality and so felt
affection for themselves. From this we are bound
to understand that the earliest impulse proceeds from
love of self. Moreover, among the earliest objects
of natural impulse pleasure has no place. Its in-
clusion among them would involve many immoral
consequences. Our affection for the objects above
mentioned needs no further proof than this, that no
one with both alternatives open to him would not
prefer that all parts ofhis body should be symmetrical
and sound, rather than dwarfed and warped, even
if their usefulness remained the same."
l
The com-
mon quality which makes objects of this class to
be preferred to their opposites by unreasoning in-
stinct is termed value. "In order to have value, a
thing must either be itself in harmony with nature
or else be the means of procuring something which
1
Cicero, De Finibus, III, 16, 17,
MORAL IDEALISM 81
is so. All objects, then, that are in accordance with
nature are relatively choiceworthy on their own ac-
count, while their opposites have negative value and
call for rejection. The primary duty is that the
creature should maintain itself in its natural con-
stitution; next, that it should cleave to all that is in
harmony with nature and spurn all that is not; and
when once this principle of choice and of rejection
has been arrived at, the next stage is choice, con-
ditioned by inchoate duty; next, such a choice is
exercised continuously; finally it is rendered un-
wavering and in thorough agreement with nature;
and at that stage the conception ofwhat good really
is begins to dawn within us and be understood.
Man's earliest attraction is to those things which are
conformable to nature, but as soon as he has laid
hold of general ideas or notions and has seen the
regular order and harmony ofconduct, he then values
that harmony far higher than all the objects for
which he had felt the earliest affection and he is led
to the reasoned conclusion that herein consists the
supreme human good. In this harmony consists
the good, which is the standard of action; from
which it follows that all moral action, nay, morality
itself, which alone is good, though of later origin in
time, has the inherent value and worth to make it
the sole object of choice, for none of the objects to
which earlier impulses are directed is choiceworthy
in and for itself."
1
Here the main tenets stand out sharply: the prior-
ity in time of the non-moral instinctive impulses
directed to self-preservation and the attainment of
external things conformable to theeconomy ofnature;
the steady growth of firmness and constancy in the
1
Cicero, De Finibus> III, 20, 21.
82 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
actions of choice and rejection to which these im-
pulses give rise; the dawn and development of
reason, as the harmony of nature begins to be under-
stood, as general notions are successively framed
and vague preconceptions made more definite by ex-
perience, until the greatest of these, the conception
of moral good, emerges clear and precise. Five
stages in the performance of duty are distinguished
by Cicero. The first four are not yet moral: they
fall within the competence of the child and mark a
continual progress on the road to virtue not yet
reached. In the last stage, when invariable consist-
ency and conformity to nature has been reached,
we recognise the ethical end as previously defined.
At this point the exposition may be profitably in-
terrupted by a few general criticisms. It has been
well said that in all ancient systems the attempt to
construct ethics on a philosophic basis easily lends
itself to reasoning in a circle. With the Stoics the
circular demonstration is the neatest and the most
easily detected of any. The semblance of cogent
deduction is illusory. The plain man is told that to
live according to nature is the end. But "nature" is
ambiguous. Sometimes the term denotes that which
is, sometimes that which ought to be, on the one
hand that which actually exists everywhere or for the
most part, as when natural impulse is said to be
directed to self-preservation, and on the other hand
that which would exist if the original plan of man's
life were fully carried out, as when to live in con-
formity with nature is identified with a life of virtue.
A similar ambiguity in the term reason did not escape
the Stoics themselves, for they sometimes contrasted
mere reason with right reason. This by the way.
Let us pass on to inquire in what life according to
MORAL IDEALISM 83
nature consists. The answer is, in a life at one with
reason, in a harmonious, consistent life, tending to
realise a single, self-consistent aim. If so, the life
according to nature must be followed because it is
the reasonable life or life according to reason. Here
the circle is complete. It is reasonable to live ac-
cording to nature and natural to live according to
reason, and as to the content ofvirtue, the particulars
of conduct, we have no more information than at the
outset. Nor is the case better if we call to our aid
the conception of knowledge. The Stoics insist that
the life which both reason and nature demand is a
virtuous life, and they agree with Socrates that
virtue is identical with knowledge. But how are the
particulars of good conduct determined ? What is
the content of this knowledge? Surely the good:
and, as they also hold that only virtue is good, not
pleasure nor merely theoretical cognition, the circle
is again complete.
Fresh difficulties arise over the distinction drawn
by them between natural instinct and rational im-
pulse, for both turn out, after all, to be concerned
with the same class of objects, viz., the things in-
different which are according to nature. Reason,
it is true, desires the good, but this supreme end
is realised by the immediate choice of things not
in themselves good. As Cicero urges, what can be
more illogical than to assert that, after acquiring a
knowledge of the supreme good, we turn back to
nature and seek from her a principle of right con-
duct? For it is not our views of conduct which
impel us to seek the objects that are in agreement
with nature: on the contrary, it is by these objects
that all impulse and all activity are called into being.
1
1
Cicero, De Finfbus, IV, 4&
84 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
It may, perhaps, be fairer to regard the assumption
that virtue is the sole good as a postulate which can
only be justified when the results following from it
are tested by experience. The test applied is that
of success or failure. The Stoics are entitled to argue
that to desire the unattainable is futile and stands
self-condemned, and that, as certain things are not
in our power to command, our efforts must be with-
drawn from them and concentrated upon those
things which are in our power, our volitions, pur-
poses, moral character in short, our inner life. By
confining our attention to these we can insure
success. This brings us to the conception in which
success is embodied as happiness or welfare. Nei-
ther of these English equivalents of the Greek term
Eudaemonia is free from misleading associations.
It is not primarily a state of feeling, still less does it
connote enjoyment of external prosperity, but rather
corresponds to the objective condition established
when the end is attained. If so, it is something
more akin to perfection or self-realisation, as these
terms are used by modern theorists. To be happy
on the rack is unintelligible unless by this so-called
happiness is understood the consciousness of an
objective relation. "When the mind," says Hume,
"by Stoical reflections is elevated into a sublime
enthusiasm of virtue, and strongly smit with any
species of honour or public good, the utmost bodily
pain and sufferance will not prevail over such a high
sense of duty; and 'tis possible, perhaps, by its
means even to smile and exult in the midst of tor-
tures. But how," Hume pertinently asks, "can the
philosopher support this enthusiasm itself?"
1
As I
1
Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, Part I (II, 383,
ed. Green and Grose),
MORAL IDEALISM 85
conceive it, the answer becomes clearer from the an-
alogy of the arts. The poet, the painter, the mu-
sician have made their way into a new world of
beauty, where their creative impulse finds free play,
and they exercise their art for art's sake alone.
Similarly the dawn of reason opens a new world to
the Stoic, where he also is awake and alive to the
symmetry and harmony and charm of moral ideas.
There his creative impulse finds free play in dis-
interested conduct, and, as with the artist, so with
him, the gratification of this impulse, or, as Hume
calls it? enthusiasm, absorbs all his energies. In
both alike the impelling motive is the attractive
force of beauty, in die one case aesthetic, in the other
moral.
To resume. In the view of the Stoics a rational
life, in conformity with the general course of the
world, is the highest good. Virtue alone is good
and welfare or happiness consists exclusively in
virtuous action. Virtue is the fountain or source
from which particular actions flow. It is a per-
manent disposition, when the soul is set or bent to
realise harmony and consistency in the whole of con-
duct. Such a condition of soul is to be chosen for
its own sake and not from the expectation of good
or fear of evil, for no external results following upon
it could possibly increase or diminish its absolute
and unconditional value. Hence Chrysippus ridiculed
the Platonic myths of rewards and punishments in a
future life as bugbears intended to frighten children.
The life of the bad man upon earth is the true hell
Whether the virtuous disposition be interpreted as a
state of the will or of the intellect, the Stoics were
bound by their psychology to maintain its unity.
Their definition of prudence, one of the virtues, viz.,
86 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
that it is the science of what should be done and
what should be left undone and ofthings indifferent,
would stand mutatis mutandis for any of the others.
At the same time they were entitled to recognise,
not only the four cardinal virtues, prudence, temper-
ance, courage, and justice, but also to subordinate to
these a number of others generally recognised as
commendable qualities. They merely explained that
by a plurality of virtues is only meant the different
manifestations in action of the virtuous disposition
in various relations to different objects, in all of
which relations it is essentially the same. Thus the
same priceless knowledge or science which becomes
courage when directed to objects inspiring fear or
confidence or a neutral attitude is known as temper-
ance when it is directed to objects of choice or avoid-
ance or to those indifferent things which call for
neither of these attitudes. It is also justice in so far
as it assigns to each man his deserts. "Virtue," says
Aristo, "when it considers what should be done and
what should not be done, is called prudence; when it
controls desire and defines what is moderate and
seasonable in pleasures, it is called temperance; when
it is concerned with dealings and contracts with
other men, it is called justice."
l
In any case these
several particular virtues mutually accompany each
other. A man cannot be perfect unless he possesses
all the virtues, nor can an action be perfect unless
it is done in accordance with all the virtues, so that,
virtue being one and indivisible, it is impossible to
possess a single virtue without possessing all. This
holds of altruistic conduct, for the Stoics believed
that self-regarding virtues cannot exist without the
social virtues. The good of society is best attained
1
Plutarch, Vwt. Mot., 441 A.
MORAL IDEALISM 87
by each individual pursuing his own good. The per-
manence of this virtuous disposition implies that,
once attained, it can never be lost, so long as man is a
rational being, and it becomes a minor question of
casuistry whether the circumstances which tend to
impair the supremacy of reason, such as intoxication
or hypochondria, involve a temporary lapse from
virtue.
Another consequence which follows directly from
the definition was often presented in an offensive
paradoxical form, viz., that there can be no degrees
in virtue and no middle point between virtue and
vice. A man's disposition either is virtuous or it is
not. As there are no degrees in straightness, so one
virtue is equally virtuous with another and all sin
and vice, by tie mere fact that it falls short of
this absolute perfection, is on the same footing of
equal depravity. This conclusion, so repugnant
to common sense; and 'the ordinary conventions of
human society, can be rendered intelligible by a
comparison with New Testament >
teaching, as when
St. Paul maintains that whatever is n0t of faith is
of sin, or wKen i is laid dorox thatJi who offends
in one point is guilty of^the_whole law. Such
teaching, whether Christian^or^ Sjtoic, is bound to
divide the worlcfl:JriSI^^
classes, saiatLand^ wise,,and ,tlie fooJish,
between whom there is a great gulf fixed. Popular
Christianity admits" thatTan""individual man may
pass from the one class to the other by conversion,
and there are traces of a similar belief among some
of the Stoics. But, on the whole, Stoicismwas chary
of bestowing the appellation "wise" upon any actual
man. To the question, Who, then, are the wise?
the Stoic probably of any age, and certainly the later
88 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Stoics, would point either to legendary heroes, like
Hercules and Ulysses, or among historical men
to famous names of an earlier and far-off time.
To the founders of the school Socrates, Antisthenes,
and Diogenes served as examples; at a later date,
Zeno and Chrysippus. By the Stoics of the Empire,
Cato was, so to speak, canonised. But we have
every right to infer that just as Epictetus does not
claim to be himself wise and perfect, so neither did
any of the eminent Stoics who preceded him make
a similar claim in their own lifetime,
It comes to this, then, that the wise man is an
ideal and Stoicism a system of moral idealism.
But this was never fully recognised because the
Stoics at the same time held this ideal to be capable
of complete realisation here and now by any man
whoJollowed.the. dictates of reason. Instead of re-
nouncing the task of attaining an impossible wisdom,
the school introduced the conception of progress
toward virtue. Life on this view becomes a grand
experiment. Teacher and pupil alike are engaged
in one common endeavour. They set out as ad-
venturers in quest of well-being or, like Bunyan's
pilgrims, on a long and toilsome journey. The
Stoic cherishes no illusions as to the moral condition
of those in this state of progress or probation; he is
conscious that they have not yet attained to virtue
and, ipso facto, must still be reckoned among the
unwise and sinful. The rigid demands of ideal
morality are never one jot abated. On the high seas,
he who is one foot below the surface is drowned
as surely as if he were five hundred fathoms down.
And so Chrysippus lays down firmly that he who has
almost completed his progress toward virtue, who
discharges all moral duties in every way, without
MORAL IDEALISM 89
omitting any, has, nevertheless, not yet attained the
life of well-being and happiness.
1
One thing is
still lacking. Yet, as the Stoics were honestly
bent upon the moral improvement of mankind, they
came to concentrate their energies more and more
upon the effort to initiate, encourage, and continue
in every one, however ignorant and sinful the idea, the
hope and ardent desire ofmaking progress. Indeed,
this is the chief content of philosophy to later Stoics,
such as Seneca and Epictetus. But it would be an
error to suppose that this was an innovation or that
it had been neglected by the founders. We have
express testimony to the contrary. Zeno claimed
that dreams furnished an easy test bywhich any one
might discover whether he were making progress.
If he found upon examination that even in sleep
his imagination never ran on impure delight, evil
thoughts or actions, this was a sure sign.
2 Cleanthes
says in a striking passage: "Man walks in wicked-
ness all his -life or, at any rate, for the greater part
of it. Ifhe ever attains to virtue, it is late and at the
very sunset of his days.
3 * * Here he evidently has in
mind the state of probation and the possibility that
the probationer may not have emerged from itwhen
death overtakes him. The explicit testimony of
Chrysippus to such a state has already been cited.
We pass now to that side of the system in which
some 4 have seen a concession to the demands of
common sense, a modification of abstract theory to
meet practical considerations. The charge seems
unwarranted, but it concerns the precise point on
1
Stobseus, Florikgium, 103, 22; Von Arnim, Vol. Ill, No. 510, p. 137.
a
Pearson, fragments of Zeno and Cleanthes, No. 160, p. 196; Von
Arnim, Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta, Vol. I, No. 234, p. 56.
3
Pearson, No. 51, p. 281; Von Arnim, Vol. I, No. 529, p. 120.
4
.
#., Zeller, Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics, c. XI, p. 278.
90 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
which Zeno and all his school diverged from the
Cynics, whose doctrine in this particular was re-
tained by Zeno's heterodox pupil Aristo. What is the
attitude of a perfectly wise and good man to external
things ? The Cynics and Aristo maintained that,
since virtue alone is good and vice alone is evil, this
attitude should be to treat all other things as abso-
lutely indifferent, attaching no value to one in pref-
erence to another. At this rate wealth and poverty,
health and sickness, sight and blindness, life and
death, are to the sage of absolutely no moment.
There is no rational ground why any one of them
should move his will rather than any other. Such
a view carried out strictly means the upheaval of
all society, and the revolutionary Cynics did so
carry it out. Aristo was free from the extravagances
of the Cynics, but like them, he rejected physics and
logic as useless, thus narrowing down philosophy to
the precepts of practical morality. All authorities
agree that Zeno introduced the conception of value
in the estimation of things external and coined a pair
of uncouth technical terms to designate the classes
of things which have positive and negative value
respectively, calling the former desirable and pre-
ferred, the other undesirable and unpreferred.
1
In
this connection value must be understood as a
relative term, but value for what or for whom ?
Presumably for the agent, because he can put the
external things to a good or a bad use. This value
does not reside in the things themselves, but in the
judgment of the reason. Even the child, before he
develops reason, is prompted by nature to prefer
certain external things to their opposites. What,
then, is the ground alike of the rational judgment
1
Proegmena and ApoproSgmena.
MORAL IDEALISM 91
and of the instinct ? It is not that the things pre-
ferred contribute or co-operate to our well-being or
happiness. To make such an admission would be
a fatal mistake, for if health and wealth were pro-ductive of the good, it would be impossible to deny,as all Stoics invariably do, that they are themselves
entitled to rank as goods.
There is a similar difficulty, it may be remarked,
in Aristotle's ethical theory. His end, miscalled
happiness, is a good per se. But, unlike the Stoics,
he admitted that there were other goods per se in,
and for themselves desirable, such as wisdom and
pleasure; and the relation of these latter to his
chief and highest good, his end or happiness, he no-
where clearly explains. The difficulty is far greater
with the Stoics, who recognise only one good per se,
viz., virtuous activity. The ultimate fact is the
judgment of preference. The external thing pre-
ferred is capable of moving the will, which must be
because it has a natural attraction. That when so
much has been admitted they should still refuse to
call it good, either per se or even as a means to good
per se is a strange inconsistency. Why does the
Stoic take care of his health ? Because it is a re-
quirement of reason, a commandment of God,
because he has certain knowledge that salva virtute
health is more according to nature than sickness,
and therefore to be preferred, so far as extraordinary
considerations do not come into play. And, since
happiness consists in the attainment of what we
will, the performance ofduty in this respect oftaking
care of health is in itself a good per se, which is at-
tained by the mere act of preference. We should
not be happy if without regard to circumstances we
refused to prefer health or deliberately rejected it for
92 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
sickness.
1
The deepest thought of Stoic ethics is
that virtuous or vicious life is not to be regarded as a
sum of isolated virtuous or vicious actions, but as
an inward unity governed by a single principle, good
or bad will, godly or worldly disposition, spirit or
flesh. The class of things preferred is illustrated by
such mental qualities as genius, skill, moral progress;
such bodily qualities as life, health, strength, sound-
ness of constitution and limb, beauty; such ex-
ternal advantages as wealth, repute, noble birth.
With one exception, that of life, all the items on this
list are accidents of individual men and not essential
constituents of human nature. Most of them are
held to be "gifts of fortune." To the Stoic they are
the dispensations of Providence, results of the divine-
ly appointed, unalterable course of nature. When
they come to him, he gratefully accepts them and
makes the most of them; when they do not come
or are taken away, he as cheerfully dispenses with
them. For he knows well that true happiness does
not depend upon them; their presence or absence
leaves unaffected the pearl ofgreat price, the true and
only good, which is at all times within his reach, if
he so wills. But none the less he is bound to take
a rational view of his environment and estimate every
object at its due value. This judgment of value
determines impulse and action and converts the
thing so judged into material for the exercise of
virtue. Or the same thing may be otherwise ex-
pressed by insisting on the importance of attend-
ing to perceptions and using them correctly. Since
the term perception here includes presentations to
thought as well as to sense, our entire attitude toward
and judgment upon outward reality is thus summed
Eclogue, Vol. II, p. 86 (Wachsmuth).
MORAL IDEALISM 93
up. Sin is propagated by bad example and false in-
struction, but in part it is due to the deceitfulness of
appearances, the false suggestions to which outward
things give rise. Against this deception reason is an
effectual guard onlywhen it is trained and disciplined.
Thus alone we learn to appraise each thing at its
true value, for, as above remarked, things them-
selves tell us nothing oftheir true value.
We have thus unfolded the conception of a scale
of value, positive and negative, to be assigned to all
external tilings. In themselves they are neither mor-
ally good nor morally evil. Such a conception is
intimately connected with the rudimentary theory
of duty expressed in the technical term Kathekon,
which Cicero rendered by offidum. Duty, in the
strict imperative sense, is not a Stoic conception.
Etymologically, the Greek term Kathekon is wholly
destitute ofthe notion ofobligation or categorical im-
perative and might, indeed, be translated "suitable"
rather than "right," where by "suitable" is meant
"
becoming to man," suitable to his nature and being.
Such was the meaning given to the term by Zeno,
who first introduced it into ethics.
1
But so much
casuistical discussion took place upon what was or
was not suitable that a train of associations became
attached to the word, associations which were after-
ward inherited by the Romans. Thus the modern
idea of duty grew up, fostered by the Roman char-
acter and their love of law, and ultimately borrowing
its expression from the formulas of Roman juris-
prudence, as the term "obligation" itself testifies.
1
Cleanthes and Chrysippus sometimes use Epiballon apparently as a
substitute for Kathekon. The literal meaning of Epiballon is "that
which falls to or upon," of Kathekon "that which reaches to" or
"arrives at," $c,, some particular agent.
94 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Various definitions of the "suitable" are given by the
earlier Stoics. They explain it as (i) an action
adapted to the arrangements of nature, (2) the con-
sistent or harmonious in life and conduct. And
herewe may pause to notice that the Stoics recognised
this quality of consistency or harmony as in some
measure exhibited in the vital functions of irrational
creatures, in plants and the lower animals, though
its highest manifestation was in the rational being,
man. Lastly, Kathekon was defined as (3) that
which, being done, admits of reasonable justification.
Over against the whole class of actions, suitable and
consistent, was set the opposite class, actions which
infringed or violated natural fitness. The instances
of suitable actions cited have a wide range. They
include, not only the purely selfish fchoice of any
external things which are according to nature and
have value, but also much besides, much that the
ordinary consciousness and customary morality
recognised as things suitable and expedient to be
done. Thus such rules of conduct as to worship the
gods, to honour and love one's parents, to take part
in public life, to marry and rear children, had the
sanction of public opinion in Greece and sometimes
of positive law. But the meaning of the suitable and
proper is not yet exhausted. Virtuous activity, the
practice of prudence, justice,, and courage, cannot
possibly be excluded from the class of actions under
consideration, and we are expressly told that every
violation of propriety and expediency is, ipso facto,
a sin.
What, then, is the fundamental conception of this
class of action, and how is the suitable related to the
right action ? The perplexity of the problem is in-
creased by two statements. The first is attributed
MORAL IDEALISM 95
to Zeno and is to the effect that the class of suitable
actions and their opposites occupies an intermediate
position between moral action, which is good, and
immoral action, which is evil.
1
The inference would
seem to be that Zeno was thinking of actions in
themselves morally indifferent, and some of the
instances cited by other authorities, such as to con-
verse, to walk, to eat, to bathe, support this inference.
The second statement comes, not from Zeno, but
from later Stoics who treated suitable conduct as
a generic conception, including two distinct species,
the one morally intermediate, the other morally com-
plete. The contrast is no longer between the suit-
able and the right, for the completed performance
of the suitable is declared to be the right, to be truly
virtuous or moral conduct. At the same time the
complete performance is declared impossible for any
but the sage. Even if the external act is the same,
its performance by ordinary unwise men falls short
of the right, because it either is not done from the
right motive or has some other inherent formal
defect. Thus, if Zeno had intended originally that
the term Kathekon, of which he was the inventor,
should be restricted to acts in themselves morally in-
different, his intention was frustrated by the subse-
quent development of his system. The conception
of moral progress received increasing attention,
and Chrysippus allowed that the probationer who
is nearing the end of his course performs all suitable
actions on all occasions without omitting any;
all that he needs to realise happiness is that his per-
formance of these intermediate actions should ac-
quire certainty, constancy, and a characteristic firm-
ness. Chrysippus could not have written this if the
1
Cicero, Acad. Post, I, 37.
96 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
sphere of Kathekon were a lower morality. On the
contrary, it was the very material of virtuous action,
for none could realise happiness but the truly wise
and virtuous. It is not the external act, the season-
able thing done, which makes the difference, but the
motive, the intention, the virtuous disposition of the
agent and the conscious reference of the act to the
supreme end of a moral life. The ordinary unwise
man is, as a rule, incapable ofrecognising on the spur
of the moment what are the actions suitable in the
various relations and contingencies of life, and will
therefore overlook many such actions; nor will he
perform those he recognises in the proper way, e. g.,
duties to parents. The restoration of a deposit may
be performed by an ordinary man or by the sage. In
both cases it is a suitable action, but the sage alone
knows how to perform it with justice; therefore, it
is only in his case that the performance is virtuous
and right. Moreover, the performance of suitable
actions by the unwise is at all times irregular, not
to be depended on, not proof against temptation.
From this point of view the attempt to assign a dis-
tinct province to actions suitable and appropriate,
which shall be neither morally good nor morally
evil, seems to break down. The class of actions in
question is a logical abstraction which it is useful
to define; but as soon as we come to actual per-
formance all actions, like all individual agents, must
be ranked as either virtuous or vicious, moral or im-
moral. To worship the gods, tohonour one's parents,
stock instances of things suitable, can only fail of
being moral acts through some flaw in the perform-
ance or from the absence of the right intention.
When Cleanthes, at the end of his hymn, declares
praise and honour of Zeus to be the highest privilege
MORAL IDEALISM 97
of all rational beings, the whole context shows that
he regards the rendering of this praise and honour,
not as a thing morally indifferent, but as absolutely
right and good.
It may be urged as an objection to this account
of the matter that the absolute character of moral
rules is impaired by making the suitable the ground-
work and subject-matter of right conduct. But this
rests on a misapprehension. No moral precepts
can have higher sanction than conformity to nature
or reason, which are characteristics of the suitable,
according to the definitions above given. The earlier
Stoics emphasised the essential relativity and con-
ventionality ofthe received precepts and conceptions,
and in so doing grossly offended against good taste
and natural sentiment, though, unlike the Cynics,
they never attempted to put their paradoxical con-
clusions into practice. But they did not propose to
supersede popular morality by a new code of rules,
immutable and binding apart from all reference to
the end. According to them, the end is immutable,
the means of attaining it are not. Conformity to
virtue and reason admits of variation, according
to the various circumstances in which the agent
finds himself. Over and over again it will happen
that the same action may be at one time suitable
and expedient and at another time, under altered
circumstances, unsuitable and inexpedient for the
same individual agent. All particular acts, then, are
relative to circumstances. Of possible or conceiv-
able actions in life, some correspond to durable,
others to temporary relations, some are occasional,
arising out of special circumstances, others normal,
without regard to special circumstances. It would
be erroneous to equate the suitable with conditional,
98 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the right with unconditional duties, as Zeller seems
inclined to do, for in any given case there is a line
of action prescribed by the relation, whether durable
or temporary, occasional or normal, and, however
hard to determine, this course of conduct, as being
conformable to reason, is absolutely and uncondition-
ally binding.
Later Stoics, e. ., Epictetus, have a threefold di-
vision, actions tending (i) to preservation of exis-
tence, (2) to formation of a definite character by the
choice of what is in accordance with nature and
the rejection of what is contrary to nature, (3) acts
essentially moral. In the last and highest class are
found the duties which the unwise systematically
ignore, such as universal, disinterested benevolence,
renunciation of revenge, love of enemies.
The theory of appropriate action in the guise of
inchoate duty admits of a very special application to
the case of suicide. That under any circumstances
the school should have held suicide to be justifiable
is an astonishing fact. It seems to render their
ethical optimism illusory. But our surprise is
diminished when we give closer attention to the
general principles of the system and the conditions
under which alone suicide was permitted. First
of all, it is a tenet of the Stoics that happiness is
independent of temporal duration. Virtue does
not consist in doing the greatest possible number
of good actions, but in an uninterrupted series of
such acts. Temporal prolongation, whether in this
life or in a life hereafter, can add nowhit to happiness,
its characteristic is seasonableness. Next we will
cite the conditions as laid down on orthodox Stoic
lines by Cicero, premising that death and the time
of death are neither morally good nor morally evil,
MORAL IDEALISM 99
but things indifferent. "Since things morally in-
different form the starting-point for all appropriate
actions, it is not without reason said that they con-
stitute the test for deciding on all our plans, and
among them those about departure from life and
continuance in life. When the bulk of a man's
circumstances are in accord with nature, it is appro-
priate for him to remain in life; when the balance is
on the other side, or seems likely to be so, it is ap-
propriate for such a man to quit life. This proves
that it is sometimes appropriate for the wise man to
quit life, though he is in possession of happiness, and
for the fool to continue in life, though wretched.
For the primary natural advantages, whether pros-
perous or adverse, are submitted to the wise man's
judgmentand discrimination. They form, as itwere,
the field for the exercise of wisdom, while good and
evil are the results of the choice. So any plan for
continuing in life or departing from it is entirely
to be estimated with reference to the primary natural
advantages. For it is not virtue that keeps a man
among the living, nor are those who are destitute of
virtue bound to seek for death. So it is often an
appropriate action for the wise man to turn his back
on life, though enjoying happiness to the full, if he
can do it seasonably, that is, consistently with a life
in harmony with nature. Wisdom herself enjoins
upon the wise man that he should leave her if need
require. Thus, inasmuch as vice has not the effect
of affording a motive for suicide, it is plain that the
appropriate course even for the unwise, 'who are,
ipso factOy wretched, is to continue in life if they are
surrounded by circumstances the majority of which
are in accord with nature. And seeing that the
unwise man, whether he quits life or continues in it,
100 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
is equally wretched, and long duration does not make
life any more for him a matter to be avoided, it is
not without reason maintained that men who can
enjoy a preponderance of things in accord with
nature must continue in life."
1
This passage leaves the decision to each man's
judgment, on a review of his external circumstances.
The door is open; no one compels him to stay.
Otherwise it could not be claimed for the sage that he
was independent ofexternal things. But later Stoics,
who treat more fully of this subject, lessened con-
siderably the freedom of choice, while at the same
time they emphasised one situation in which the duty
is imperative. This is often expressed by the mili-
tary metaphor. The suicide acts in obedience to
the call of God, How can we recognise this call ?
Solely by reason, not by a supernatural sign or in-
ward admonition. When a life in accordance with
nature is no longer possible, when we have no means
to life, when we can only live by loss of personal
honour or through dereliction of duty, then we
must obey the call and go. Under such circum-
stances to remain in life is an act of cowardice as
heinous as ifwe should shrink from death for country
or friend; nay, more, it would render all our sur-
viving life useless. "He who by living is of use to
many ought hot to choose to die," says Musonius,
"unless by death he can be of use to more."
2
But
the later Stoics fully recognised that suicide might
be an immoral act if, for example, it proceeded from
rashness, obstinancy, vanity, love of glory, ignorance
of social duties. The end of Peregrinus, as related
by Lucian, was clearly prompted by vanity and self-
1
Cicero, De Pinibus, III, 60, 61,
3
Stob^us, FlQrilegium> VII, 25.
MORAL IDEALISM 101
advertisement. Seneca allowed the infirmities of
old age, incurable disease, and a weakening of the
powers of the mind to be satisfactory reasons for
taking leave of life, but Epictetus reduced within very
narrow limits the bodily circumstances which justify
suicide. He would probably have admitted that
it was foolish to bear unnecessary pains, but, as
according to him, sickness forms a natural constit-
uent of human life, disease in itself cannot furnish
a moral ground for quitting it. Banishment under
very oppressive circumstances might serve as an
excuse, but isolation is in itself no bar to happiness.
Moreover, he is earnest in recommending all pos-
sible effort to support life; at the worst, he says,
you can wait till you die of hunger. The idea
of a stain to personal honour, which in one instance,
the death ofan athlete,
1
Epictetus allows to be a valid
justification, is not clearly defined and admits of
dangerous extension, for, though nothing of the kind
can touch the soul, yet quite trivial insults, e. g., the
loss ofhis beard by a philosopher,
2
might come under
this head. Besides, personal honour and dignity
vary with the individual, and, though suicide for
Cato was glorious, that of another man under the
same circumstances might not have been so. The
casuistry on the subject is necessarily concerned with
the action of good men, whether already wise or on
the road to wisdom. What the unwise do in their
unwisdom is a matter of less moment. This much
is certain; that, so far from calling forth moral repro-
bation, suicide would be for them a consistent end
to an immoral career. Here the reader of Scott will
recall the answer received by Dugald Dalgetty from
1
Arrian, Dissertations, I, 2, 26.
*/&.,!, 16, 9.
102 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
his compatriot of the Scottish convent in Wiirtzburg,
whom he consulted upon a point of conscience.
It has already been said that the Stoics dwelt upon
the activity and energy of the virtuous life, and in-
deed in their whole psychology took little account
of the element of feeling. This becomes still more
apparent when we approach the subject of emotion.
There are here four classes of feelings to be con-
sidered: (i) morbid and vicious emotion, which can
only exist in rational beings, children and brutes
being exempt from it; (2) rational emotion, con-
fined to the sage; (3) intermediate states of feeling,
natural and good, or at any rate inevitable, but in
all cases involuntary, not resting on free self-de-
termination; (4) sensuous physical feeling, necessary
and involuntary. This fourth class, as belonging to
the body, is opposed to all the other three, which are
mental states. As to the first class, it is matter of
common knowledge that the ^Stoics declared war
.
against the passions of mankind, which they con-
demned as irrational, and therefore vicious and sin-
ful. The wise man who is the embodiment ofreason
is exempt from vicious emotion, as from all the weak-
nesses of ordinary humanity, and this picture of the
passionless sage has always caught the popular
imagination. As we shall see, there is one-sided
exaggeration in the picture. If vicious emotion is
uprooted, there is still room for rational joy and satis-
faction, rational desire, rational fear, so that the
sage is anything but devoid of all feeling. But it
is true that neither the virtuous emotion of the sage,
nor the vicious passions of ordinary men are con-
ceived as simply states of feeling. The Stoic psy-
chology in its premature effort at unification does
not separate clearly will from feeling or either ele-
MORAL IDEALISM 103
ment from intellect. In impulse (Horme), whether
rational in man or instinctive in brutes, the voli-
tional side predominates. But in the four great
classes of vicious emotion, pain and pleasure, which
relate to the present, desire and fear, which relate
to the future, the element of feeling, of excessive
mental excitement, is more apparent than the ele-
ment of will. Every impulse implies a presenta-
tion to sense or thought, and the impulse or move-
ment of soul toward a thing or away from it is
conditioned by an act of mental assent, a judgment
that the object presented is of a certain character.
If it be judged good, it excites the hope of its attain-
ment and the fear of missing it; if evil, feelings of
an opposite nature. In a rational being the judg-
ment, and therefore the resulting impulse, is the
work ofthe mind (Hegemonikon). When, therefore,
ordinary men giveway to the passions ofpain or fear,
their reason, the central governing principle of their
soul has, in the very act of giving way, pronounced
that which causes the pain or fear to be evil; and
similarly, the passions of pleasure and desire in-
volve a judgment that the objects which inspire
them are good. If such judgments are erroneous,
as experience shows they often are, the consequent
impulse and state of feeling are vicious and sinful.
In other words, the Stoics admit that reason can be
perverted. At the same time they do not consider
emotions to be nothing but judgments; they regard
them as caused by judgments of a particular kind,
followed by particular mental phenomena. They are
called judgments because the real cause is the essence
of a thing. But they did not separate the judgment
from the attendant phenomena; they absorbed the
pathological side in the judgment and made the
104 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
former the immediate result of the latter. Besides,
the error in this particular kind of judgment is not
purely intellectual, for instruction and reproof do
not make the victim of the error desist from his
passion. For the particular species of judgment,
belief, or opinion which generates emotion the Stoics
employed a technical term, Doxa Prosphatos (opinio
recensy to be distinguished from opinio repentina *),
which is explained to mean an opinion that is fresh,
vigorous, and forcible, calculated to upset the equilib-
rium of the reason.
2
The disturbance in any case
is voluntary and self-incurred.
Every event is determined by natural necessity,
but in the moment of judging the rational being is
free to obey reason or to disobey it. The strength
and tension ofhis soul, in the last resort, alone decides
what he will do. An impulse may be rational in the
sense that it proceeds from a rational being, and
yet in another sense irrational because this being
does not exercise his reason or exercises it amiss.
To maintain, with Socrates and the Stoics, that
virtue is essentially knowledge brings us face to face
with two alternatives: either vice is involuntary, as
Socrates held, or ignorance is voluntary. The
Stoics certainly held that all forms of vicious emo-
1
Cicero, Tusculans, III, 75.
2 Galen (De Hippocrat. et Plat, decretis, V, p. 416, Kiihn) follows the
heterodox Stoic Posidonius in the opposite view, which interprets the
technical term Prosphatos as referring not to the judgment itself, but
to good or evil wrongly opined, and gives it an exclusively temporal
meaning, "sudden" or "closely imminent." But events are in them-
selves indifferent, neither morally good nor morally evil, and nothing
of this class can be the cause of an emotion which is vicious and sinful,
It is not the unforeseenness of an event that is the cause of an emotion,
nor are we better able to bear the event by dwelling upon it beforehand;
the only real remedy against vicious emotion is to acquire right views
respecting what is good, evil, and morally indifferent. Cf. Cicero,
Tusculans, III, 55.
MORAL IDEALISM 105
tion are voluntary. The morbid and disorderly
state ofthe soul in anger or fear rests on an erroneous
judgment as to what is to be sought or shunned, and
this error might have been avoided if the man had
chosen to exercise his reason. No doubt it depended
on the innate force and firmness of a man's soul
whether his reason was thus effectually exercised;
but if the act thus proceeded from the man himself,
and not from any external cause, he must be held
responsible. The specific definitions of pleasure
as irrational elation and of pain as irrational de-
pression, to which those of desire and fear can be
assimilated, show by the materialistic terms em-
ployed that we have here another application of
the theory of tension in the primary substance of
the soul, just as virtue is sometimes defined by
strength, force, proper tension in the substance of
the material souL
Here we may notice a point of divergence from the
ethics of all those philosophers who, like Plato and
Aristotle, admit a non-rational part or faculty in the
soul. According to the latter, some part or mani-
festation ofvirtue consists in the due regulation by the
reason of the non-rational impulses, which are them-
selvesnormal and natural products ofthe non-rational
element of soul. Orthodox Stoics deny the existence
of any non-rational part of the soul. They attribute
irrational impulses or instincts, not to an irrational
faculty in the soul, but to the self-perversion of the
reason, which can act as well contrary to as accord-
ing to nature, and they call upon reason, not merely
to conquer and check these propensities, but to ex-
tirpate them altogether.
The confusion of processes of intellect and vo-
lition with states of feeling is obvious when we con-
106 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
sider the four ways in which morbid or vicious
emotion was defined. In two of these, (a) a move-
ment of soul contrary to reason and contrary to
nature, and () a false or erroneous opinion and
judgment by the rational soul, stress is laid on the
intellectual side, since a judgment no less than an
impulse is a movement of soul. Hence the more
precise definition is (V) impulse in excess, with
which agree the separate definitions (J) of vicious
desire as an irrational appetency, of fear as an ir-
rational avoidance, of pleasure as an irrational
elation, and of pain as an irrational depression.
Clearly the irrational character of the impulse is
shown in its excess. Violent and morbid excitement,
betraying a feverish or inflamed state of mind, pre-
dominates, at any rate, in pleasure and pain, though
the latent judgments "This is a good" and "That is
an evil" are even then by no means excluded. Er-
roneous judgment is the cause, morbid excitement,
mental elation, and mental depression concomitant
effects which necessarily attend upon the error; in
them the self-perversion of reason manifests itself.
In the Stoic conception the three factors, judgment,
impulse, feeling, are inextricably blended. To judge
death to be an evil, to endeavour to shun it, to be
morbidly depressed at the thought of it, are but
phases and aspects of the one vicious emotion, the
fear of death, which, however defined, necessarily
involves them all. Similarly avarice involves an
intellectual judgment that money is the true good,
a volitional impulse to obtain it, and a morbid,
inordinate delight in hoarding it- In anger, again,
the three elements are the belief that my neighbour
has done me evil (which of course, on Stoic princi-
ples, is out of his power, as I can be injured by
MORAL IDEALISM 107
nothing external, but only by myself in vice or sin),
the impulse to avenge this evil, and the morbid
emotional excitement of a painful nature which
accompanies the impulse. So, too, with pity.
Here the erroneous belief is that our neighbour's
external calamities are real evils, while the impulse
to wish the course of external events other than it is
ordained, is bound up with a feeling of pain and an-
noyance that things are as they are. The Stoic did
what he could to relieve the misfortunes of others,
but the indulgence of sentimental pity or grief was
incompatible with his cheery optimism and faith
in Providence.
Let us now turn to the second class, that of rational
emotion. The Stoic temper does not imply absolute
freedom from all emotion, but only from irrational
mental storms. The sage is not hard and unfeeling,
like a block of marble. He is subject to the normal
feelings which are necessarily bound up with rational
conduct and the right theory of life. These are as
voluntary as the vicious emotions. To the false
fear of future calamities corresponds in his case a
godly fear or circumspection, a conscientiousness
and wariness in guarding against moral failings.
He has no other fear, for sin and vice are the only
evils he can dread. Closely allied to this is the feeling
of shame which shrinks from moral disgrace and
just blame. So, too, his rational will, which is al-
ways directed to moral good, is the counterpart of
vicious desire prompted by fancied goods. Under
this head come goodwill, affection, and love to our
neighbour, which is purely disinterested, not for our
own sake but for his. This feeling inspires to
social service and universal philanthropy. Even
personal affection is not forbidden to the sage, but
108 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the feeling is excited, not by sensuous beauty alone,
but by the capacity for virtue. In rational fear and
rational desire, though they are mainly volitional
processes, the element of feeling is present; and this
is still more true of rational joy or satisfaction, which
is the counterpart in the sage of vicious pleasure in
the unwise. Rational fear, rational will, rational
joy are the only forms of rational emotion. It fully
accords with Stoic optimism that there should be no
counterpart in the sage, to the mental pain, the grief
and sorrow, the envy and hatred of the unwise.
Submission to the course of events is attended by
moral elation, by cheerfulness and confidence.
The road to freedom, the only escape from slavery,
is joy resting on a clear knowledge of man's nature
and destiny. This joy and confidence must be
permanent and lasting, at any rate in the sage; the
constancy of his joy is one mark of his perfect well-
being. The highest ideal is an inner harmony of
the soul, which is necessarily conjoined with feelings
ofjoy, contentment, and exaltation, and shows itself,
not only in the whole nature and deportment, but
even externally in the countenance. This joy is re-
lated to virtue as an inseparable concomitant; it
stands so near to the essence of virtue that it is not
only natural but in itself a good.
Thus far emotion has been described as of two
kinds, the one vicious and morbid, the violent,
incalculable, and ever-shifting gusts of passion which
overtake the unwise, the other the constant, measured,
equable feelings which rest on rational knowledge
and rational self-determination. But this is not an
exhaustive classification of feeling. There are states
which are neither the one nor the other, natural
affection and joy, which arise involuntarily and
MORAL IDEALISM 109
without conscious activity of the reason. Thus,
affection for blood relations is natural and good, but
arises without man's free-will, and unless and until
it becomes goodwill and benevolence it has no pow-
er or constancy. Sexual love would at first sight an-
swer to this description, though Seneca condemns
it as madness, insana amicztia.
1
The attitude of
the school to friendship is unsatisfactory. True
friendship, they hold, can only exist between the
wise. It is thereby robbed of its peculiar significance
as a liking resting on personal sympathy. For, if
friendship only exists between wise men, and these
wise men are only made friends by reason and virtue,
and all ofthem are friends in an equal degree, friend-
ship is really destroyed. It is dissolved partly into
universal philanthropy, partly into the intellectual
communion and relation between the wise or, at any
rate, the earnest strivers after wisdom. In the same
intermediate class of emotions room must be found
for pleasure in companionship or sociability, and for
love of nature, of beauty, of knowledge. Nor could
the severance ofrational and permitted emotions from
such as are morbid and vicious be completely carried
out in practice when we extend our view to those in a
state of progress or probation. They are bound to
feel pain, grief, sorrow, and shame for their own
faults in the moment of repentance, and sometimes
also shame for the faults of others. Even Chrysip-
pus allowed that there were gradations of emotion,
and that some of them, though they hurt us, do not
make us worse. Plutarch objects that the Stoics, after
banishing emotions, bring them back under another
name. "If, being convicted by tears and trembling
and change of colour, they talk of stings and contrac-
1
Seneca Epistulae, 9, n.
110 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
tions, this is merely sophistry/''
1
Zeno, too, spoke of
the wise man exhibiting involuntary signs of anger,
the scar remaining after the wound has healed.2
Lastly, there is sensuous bodily feeling, which the
Stoics ascribed to an internal sense, an inner touch.
Strictly speaking, as emotion resides in the mind and
is voluntary self-determination of the reason, a
bodily feeling which is involuntary is not emotion in
the technical sense at all, being neither morally evil
nor morally good, but a thing indifferent. It is
unfortunate, then, that the same term pleasure
should be employed in two distinct senses for this
indifferent bodily feeling and also for the irrational
elation of soul which has the bodily feeling for its
cause and object. The reprehensible pleasure which
the Stoics denounced and sought to extirpate was
the mental state of elation at the presence of this
physical feeling, which implies the erroneous belief
that it is a good. The wise man will be subject, like
other men, to bodily pleasure and pain, but he will
never mistake bodily pleasure for real good or bodily
pain for real evil, and consequently he will never
be betrayed into that mental elation at the one and
mental depression, grief, and sorrow at the other in
which the vicious emotions of pleasure and pain con-
sist. Even in the worst bodily agonies his soul is
invulnerable. Later Stoics use die term flesh to
distinguish the bodily feeling from the mental emo-
tion. Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus agree that the
gentle movement of the flesh does not influence the
inmost spiritual nature of man. What, then, is
the moral value of the bodily feeling ? The school
was agreed as against Epicurus that pleasure was
in this sense not the good and pain in this sense not
1
Plutarch, Virt. Mor., c. 9.
a
Seneca, De Ira, I, 16, 7.
MORAL IDEALISM 111
the evil; both were included in the class of things
morally indifferent. But the precise position of
pleasure and pain in the class was debated. It has
even been inferred that pain (more properly, toil and
physical hardship) was regarded as entitled to pref-
erence over pleasure.
1
On the other hand the phys-
ical feeling of pleasure as distinct from the mental
excitement it engenders was sometimes defined as a
concomitant of certain natural wants. Thus, when
we satisfy hunger and thirst, or warm our chilled
limbs, the physical feeling is no part of the benefit
and is so far unnecessary, and yet it is an invaria-
ble addition. If it were possible to quench thirst
without pleasure, pleasure would have no raison
d'etre. We could get on just as well without it.
Epictetus calls it an external appendage, and says
that if it were away man's nature would be un-
altered. It might have been thought that this in-
variable concomitance would have been regarded as
proof of divine disposition, as part of the economy of
nature. That the school should have held pleasure
to be an invariable concomitant ofnatural wants and
yet have refused to call it natural is a remarkable in-
consistency, doubtless due to the pressure of con-
troversy with Epicurus. Here, however, they seem
to have stopped. "Not according to nature" is not
identical with "contrary to nature." It cannot be
taken as proved that physical pleasure was ever ex-
pressly declared to be unnatural. Sextus impartially
sums up Stoic opinion in these words: "The Stoics
hold pleasure to be a thing indifferent and not prefer-
red in that class; Cleanthes held that it is not accord-
ing to nature, any more than a wig or rouge, and
has no value in life; Archedemus admitted it to be
1
Stobffius, Eclogue, II, 58, 3.
112 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
according to nature in precisely the same sense as the
hairs which grow in the armpits, but denied that
it had value; Panaetius distinguished between pleas-
ures according to nature and pleasures contrary to
nature/'
1
It must be remembered that Panaetius
was on many points heterodox, and that his prede-
cessor Archedemus showed the same tendency to
eclecticism.
It will be seen that the relation of joy to virtue is
reproduced in the relation of physical pleasure to
natural necessities. This relation of an invariable
concomitant to activity at once recalls the conception
ofAristotle who, in theNicomachean Ethics, similarly
defined pleasure as not the end and motive of our
actions, but only a necessary cbncomitant of activity
according to nature, the natural perfection of every
activity and, as such, the immediate outcome of the
perfected activity.
2
What Aristotle asserted of pleas-
ure in general the Stoics restrict to the moral satisfac-
tion which attends upon virtue alone, the joy and
confidencewhich they dissociated both from the phys-
ical feeling and from the morbid emotion of pleasure.
Each of the six heads above mentioned has now
been passed under review. Something has been said
of impulse, end, virtue, the classification of objects,
the classification ofactions, and the varieties ofemo-
tion. Sometimes from lack of material, sometimes
from the nature of the subject, it is impossible to
treat these topics adequately, and there are many per-
plexing problems, problems of which, under the
circumstances, we can expect no more than a pro-
visional solution. But, such as it is, the sketch of
Stoic ethical theory is now complete.
1
Sextus Emp., XI, 73.
2
Nicomachean Ethics, X, c. 4, especially, 1174, b. 33.
CHAPTER IV
THE TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS
A system of philosophy, in order to live and thrive,
must win adherents. However reasonable its tenets,
they cannot find acceptance until they have been
presented to the notice ofmankind. Some zeal must
be shown in expounding them, since the competition
of ideas for supremacy in the spiritual world is no
less keen than the conflict between the opposing
interests ofindividualmen and peoples. Fortunately
we are in a position to see how Stoicism was incul-
cated we might almost say, preached under the
Roman empire in the first two centuries of the Chris-
tian era. Numerous treatises and epistles ofSeneca
have survived; the discourses and manual of Epic-
tetus are preserved to us in the lecture notes taken
down by his disciple Arrian; lastly, we still have
the meditations of the emperor Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, written primarily for his own admonition
and consolation, as is sufficiently clear from the gen-
uine title of his work, Marcus Aurelius To Himself.
Professional teachers like Epictetus and his master
Musonius Rufus devoted their whole lives to the
task of instructing all who were willing to hear them,
but outside this inner circle there were many men
of high position and distinction in imperial Rome,
men like Paetus Thrasea and Helvidius Priscus, who
113
114 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
took part in the philosophic propaganda and were
prepared to seal the testimony of their lives with their
blood.
From the nature of the case the teacher has two
main tasks. He must first lay hold on those who
have hitherto been indifferent to philosophy and then,
when they have been roused and awakened, he
must guide them on the painful path of progress
toward virtue. A similar distinction has been made
by the Christian preachers of every age. Some-
times they address the world, /. e., the unconverted, at
other times the Church, z. <?., the converted. Epic-
tetus makes his appeal in the first instance to the
natural capacity for virtue in everyman. "Haveyou
not received," he asks, "faculties by which you will
be able to bear all that happens, such faculties as
magnanimity, courage, endurance ? And yet God
has not only given us these faculties, but with truly
regal and paternal goodness He has given them free
from hinderance, subject to no compulsion, unim-
peded, and has put them entirely in our power.
You have received these powers free and as your
own, but you do not use them."
* "God has made
all men to be happy, to be steadfast. To this end
He has furnished the means, some things to each
person as his own and other things not as his own;
some things subject to hinderance and compulsion
and deprivation; and these things are not a man's
own; but the things which are subject to no hinder-
ances are his own; and the nature ofgood and evil,
as became His paternal care and protection, He
has made our own." 2
"What, then, is a man's
nature 1 To bite, to kick, to throw into prison, and
1
Arrian, Discourses oj Epictetus, 1, 6, 28 sq., 42 sq.
'/&.,m)24, 3-
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 115
to behead ? No, but to do good, to co-operate with
others, to wish them well/'
2
"What is human
excellence?" asks Epictetus of one of his hearers,
and proceeds: "Observe whom you yourself praise
when you praise without partiality ? Do you praise
the just or the unjust, the moderate or the immoder-
ate, the temperate or the intemperate?"
2
Man,
then, has by nature the capacity to find out and know
the truth. He has on the one hand the moral in-
tuitions technically known as preconceptions. On
the other hand he has reason and intellect in order
to develop these preconceptions and convert them
by the aid of experience into useful standards for
the judgment of reality. Even when undeveloped,
preconceptions fit a man for the vague apprehension
of moral truth. "There are certain things which
men who are not altogether perverted see by the
common notions which all possess."
3
Epictetus
credits all men with modesty and a sense of shame.
"Nature has given to me modesty, and I blush much
when I think of saying anything base/
5 4
This sense
of shame, however, can be hardened and deadened.
5
To be sure, preconceptions are in themselves mere
germs which are brought to maturity, either by re-
flection and meditation or by instruction and teach-
ing. Socrates and Zeno show how man can arrive
unaided at moral truth; but the mass of men grow
up with perverted views, so that in their case in-
struction is necessary. With the true instinct of a
teacher Epictetus tries to do justice to both facts,
that^yirtue, is essentially simple and resides itfmaiTs
own nature, and yet at the same time, thai itjs only
to be attained by continual toil, effort,_and self-
1
Arrian, IV, i, 122. 2
fl>., Ill, i, 8,
3
/&,, HI, 6, 8. /&., Fragment 52,
*
/&., I, 5,
116 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
discipline^ It is a pedagogic device to present
morality to the pupil, not as something abnormal,
but as something close at hand, something which he
has really himself willed and often unconsciously
practised. Philosophy is thus a means to a deeper
knowledge of that with which all men are already
familiar even without special instruction. Ordinary
men are inconsistent. Some things they judge dis-
graceful; other things no less shameful they wrongly
refuse to term so. Such a partial or superficial
virtue is of no great value. It is no true virtue,
since it does not rest on a right view of life. Never-
theless, it is a starting-point for moral instruction.
In arguing against the Epicureans, Epictetus urges
that their conduct is better than their principles.
They are like their master, teaching what is bad,
practising what is good.
1
"Epicurus disowned all
manly offices, those of a father of a family, of a
citizen, of a friend; but he did not, for he could
not, disown the instincts ofhuman nature any more
than the lazy Academics can cast away or blind their
own senses, though they have tried with all their
might to do it. What a shame it is when a man has
received from nature measures and rules for the
knowing of truth and does not strive to add to these
measures and rules and to improve them, but, just
the contrary, endeavours to take away and destroy
whatever enables us to discern the truth/* 2
Seneca is completely in agreement on this point.
The capacity Tor virtue is found injil^ though in
some to aTgreater degree than others. Even in the
bad, this natural endowment IsTioFextinct, though
weighed down and obscured.
3
AH alike, even the
most gifted, need philosophic instruction, if this
1
Arrian, III, 7, 18. '/&., Ill, 20, 20, *
Seneca, Ep., 94, 31,
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 117
capacity is to be fully developed.
1
In practice
Epictetus treats sin as a fact needing no explanation,
as an infatuation which can be removed by instruc-
tion. .He appeals to the sinner to will to be instructed
and makes this the really decisive factor in con-
version. No one sins of his own free-will; you
have only to will and you are good. "How is this
to be done?" he asks. "How is the victory over
such passions as anger, lust, and avarice to be ob-
tained?" "Will at length to win your own ap-
proval, will to appear beautiful to God, desire to
dwell in purity with your own pure self and with
God/* 2
"Be well assured that nothing is more
tractable than the human souL You must exercise
your will and the thing is done, it is set right; as
on the other hand relax your vigilance and all is
lost, for from within comes ruin and from within
comes help. Then you say, What good do I gain ?
And what greater good do you seek than this?
From a shameless man you will become modest;
from a disorderly man you will become orderly;
from a faithless man, faithful; from a man of un-
bridled habits, sober." 3 It has already been stated
that to the Stoics sin, like truth and right, admits of
no degrees,_ The jparadox that all sins are equal
means that a perverted direction of the will is mani-
r> ~ *" . "*-' w - - - .- , ..-^ ir
,
^
lest m every sin, however_trivial. The sins may
differ in tlie objects to which they refer, but not from
the point of view of the moral judgment. They all
come from the same source, and in all the judgment
is the same, i. e.9 it is perverse. If sin is"IfaEsgres-
sion, how far the transgressor goes astray makes no
difference to the guilt, which consists in transgressing
1
7&., 95, 36; 94, 32; 90, 44.
3
Arrian, II, 18, 19.
*/&., IV, 9,i6.
118 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
bounds at all. The intention, the pleasure in the
contemplation of an action is just as heinous as the
actual deed, and the omission of the good is equally
sinful with the doing of the bad. In the task of
instruction the pupil must co-operate with his teacher;
he must make the instruction his own. As Epic-
tetus says, "This only is given to you, to convince
yourself; and yet you have not convinced yourself.
Then I ask you, Do you attempt to persuade other
men ? And who has lived so long with you as you
with yourself? And who has so much power of con-
vincing you as you have of convincing yourself?
And who is better disposed and nearer to you than
you are to yourself? How, then, have you not yet
convinced yourself in order to learn ?"
*
"Now will
you not help yourself? And how much easier is
this help? There is no need to kill or imprison
any man or to treat him with contumely or to go
into the law courts. You must just talk to yourself.
You will be most easily persuaded; no one has more
power to persuade you than yourself/'
2
All this pre-
supposes the existence of good impulses in the man,
to which the evil impulses of his previous life yield
easily.
The conception of progress dominates the writings
of Seneca and Epictetus. Seneca in one passage
declares that this progress on theway to virtue, which
it is the aim of all instruction to promote, is virtue
itself. The road cannot be dissevered from the
goal.
3
The first step is the recognition of sin, ig-
norance, and infatuation. This is accompanied
by remorse, which, in itself a vicious, reprehensible
emotion, is in the beginner relatively necessary and
1
Arrian, IV, 6, 5.
*
/&., IV, 9, 13.3
Seneca, Ep., 89, 8: "ad virtutem venitur per ipsam."
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 119
wholesome. He must rid himself of his darkness,
and acquire a correct standard for judging good and
evil. But this is slow work and needs not only in-
struction, but also meditation and self-discipline.
Daily self-examination is prescribed,
1
and watchful-
ness against evil inclinations and temptations to
sin.2
Every failure strengthens the evil habit.3
At the same time failures and backslidings should
be no ground for discouragement.
4
Persevere, says
Epictetus, hold aloof from old companions, and
avoid occupations and pleasures which you are not
yet strong enough to resist.
5
Avoid even what is
permitted, if it tend to weaken your new convictions.
Lastly, be ever on your guard against the evil self
that lurks within.
6
Exercise your will negatively
by aversion only, and let desire fall for the present
into abeyance.
7
Behave like a convalescent in dread
of a relapse.
8
Set Socrates or Zeno or Cleanthes
before you, and measure your conduct by that
standard.* This is a period of wavering and
wandering, yet it differs from the old evil life and it
will give place to stronger convictions. If the con-
victions have once taken root, the worst is over, and
the convert will grow stronger and make progress.
It is impossible to glance at these and similar pre-
cepts without being struck by the analogy, partially
in substance and still more in method, between the
moral teaching of Stoicism and that of the New
Testament. Both Stoics and Christians regard
the life of progress as one continual struggle In which
nothing short of the utmost effort, vigilance, and in-
*
Arrian, IV, 6, 34.
*
ft., Ill, 16, 15. Ib., II, 18, 4.
*/&., IV, 19, 16. s
/&., IV, 2, i; HI, 12, 12.
*/&., Enchetriditm, 48.
7
/&., I, 4, i; Encheiridion, 2.
8
Ib., Ill, 13, 21; Encheiridion, 48. /&., Ill, 23, 32.
120 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
sight, conjoined with courage, patience, and en-
durance, can insure the victory. By both the war
is waged against the same enemies, the world of ap-
pearances without and the treacherous self within,
and with hardly an exception the Apostle's "works
of the flesh" and "fruits of the spirit"
1
can be identi-
fied with the vices and virtues ofthe Stoics.
Seneca acquaints us with a scheme of classification
by which those who are in progress toward virtue
were arranged in three classes.
2
The principle of
division is the more or less complete eradication of
vicious emotions. The lowest class includes those
who have broken with some of their sins but not
with all. Above them are ranked in the second class
men who, dissatisfied with this inconsistency, have
resolved to renounce evil passions in general though
they are still liable to occasional relapses. Those
in the highest class approximate to wisdom and per-
fect virtue. Nor is it easy to see where they fall
short of it. They are said to have got beyond the
possibility of relapse but to lack confidence in
themselves and the consciousness of their own wis-
dom. This subtle distinction forcibly recalls the
doctrine of "assurance" so widely maintained since
the Reformation by various sections of evangelical
Protestants. Upon closer examination it cannot be
said that these distinctions are marked by any hard
and fast line. The three classes tend to shade off
into each other. Quite apart from the fact that the
very idea of progress implies variation, wavering, and
alteration, much might be said for another three-
fold division of which there are some traces. All
under instruction would then be divided into (i)
converts or novices, (2) proficients, i. e., all who
1
Galatians, V, 19, 22. a
Seneca, Ep., 75, 8.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 121
are still making some progress, whatever grade
they have reached, (3) those whose education is
complete.
1
This last class Seneca expressly sepa-
rates from the wise. They are in port, he says, but
they have not yet landed. They are within sight
of wisdom and only a stone's throw off it, but they
are not there.
Epictetus, who is constantly urging his hearers
on and on, certainly makes no attempt like Seneca to
separate them into definite classes. Instead of
doing so, he is chiefly concerned with a course of in-
struction and discipline which he regards as neces-
sary for all. In this course there are three stages,
the first relating to desire and aversion, the second
to impulse and action, the third to judgment and
assent. The novelty here is that a Stoic should
separate the species desire from its genus impulse,
under which it was ordinarily subsumed. So far
aswe know, this separation was original in Epictetus,
and was probably dictated by practical considera-
tions, for, though undoubtedly orthodox, he every-
where treats the theoretical side of his system with
great freedom. In his discourses physic, ethic, and
logic are intermingled, according to the needs of the
particular subject and occasion. Even the order of
succession of his three stages serves a purely prac-
tical and educational purpose. The first stage is
intended to secure in the pupil a right attitude of
mind toward external things and events. By it he
is taught to shape desire in accordance with reason.
The outcome is that freedom from morbid emotions,
that tranquillity which the Stoics called apathy.
In the second stage the mind so trained is directed
to action. Having learned to recognise true good,
1
Seneca, Ep., 72, ia
122 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
which is also his true interest, the pupil is practised
in the performance of those duties which are incum-
bent upon him in the various relations he sustains
to the universe at large and to his fellow-creatures.
He is taught how he is to act as a devout man, as a
father, a son, a brother, a citizen, a member of the
world-commonwealth, and not only in those relation-
ships to which he is born, but in those upon which
he has entered by voluntary association with others.
The problem is, How does the right view of life
realise itself in all these moral relationships through
action ? Hence this second stage may be fairly de-
scribed as dealing with the whole range of duty
(Kathekon), duty to self, to God, to one's neighbour,
and to mankind at large. The third stage is more
advanced. Epictetus expressly recommends its post-
ponement until proficiency has been attained in the
other two. It consists mainly of such a thorough
logical training as will insure an unerring judgment,
a judgment which cannot be shaken by reasoning,
and in particular by the sophisms and fallacies of
opponents. By the first and second stages the pupil
has been taught to make his will and his action con-
form to certain principles, e. g., he has learned not
to lie and why he ought not to lie. The third stage
is intended to confirm him in these principles, to
safeguard the reasonings on which they depend, to
render the demonstration of them secure and im-
pervious to assault, and to endow his every act of
judgment and assent with unshakable firmness.
Butwe will cite our author's own words: "There are
three subjects in which a man ought to exercise him-
self, if he would be wise and good. The first deals
with the desires and aversions, and its object is that
we may not fail to get whatwe desire and may never
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 123
fall into that which we would fain avoid. The
second deals with the impulses or movements toward
things or away from things, and generally with the
performance"ofwhat is suitable" (Kathekon). "Its
object is that our conductmay be regular, reasonable,
and not careless. The third deals with the elimina-
tion of deception and rash judgment and with as-
sent generally. Of these subjects the chief and
most urgent is the first which deals with vicious pas-
sions, for their sole cause is our failing to obtain
what we desire and falling into that which we would
fain avoid. Hence come perturbations, tumults,
discomfitures, sorrows, lamentations, envyings, all
of which prevent us from even hearing the voice of
reason. The second subject is the suitable or duty.
I ought not to be unfeeling like a statue, but I ought
to cherish my relationships, whether natural or volun-
tarily formed, as a pious man, as a son, as a brother,
as a father, as a citizen. The third subject begins to
be incumbentwhen some progress has been attained.
Its aim is to make the other two secure, so that even
in sleep, intoxication, or hypochondria we may not
let any presentation pass untested/*
l
That the aim of the third subject or topic is not
theoretical, but directly moral and practical, may be
seen from the censure passed upon those who would
engage in it before they have mastered the first and
second. "As if all your affairs were well and secure,
you were busy with the final subject, that of un-
shakable firmness. But what would you make
unshakably firm? Cowardice, mean spirit, the
admiration ofthe rich, futile desire, avoidance which
fails of its end. These are the things about whose
security you have been anxious." 2 The result of
1
Arrian, III, 2. *
Ib., HI, 26, 14.
124 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
this hurrying on to the last stage before the desires
and impulses have been properly disciplined is
neatly satirised thus: "Therefore we lie, but the
demonstration that we ought not to lie we have
at our fingers
5
ends."
l
It is remarkable that in several passages Epictetus
disclaims for himself any special aptitude for this,
the most advanced stadium of instruction. He al-
most implies that it should be left to professed
logicians. And yet many of his discourses are taken
from it, and he is always sound on the theoretical
issue that without such an unswerving rectitude of
judgment no one can reach the highest level of
progress, or so much as approximate to the ideal of
the wise and good. But the dialectical certainty
which these higher logical studies promote is only
valuable as the necessary condition for moral cer-
tainty and infallibility. In thus separating the three
stages of instruction, Epictetus must have had the
needs of his pupils before his eyes. He wishes them
to undergo from first to last a course of discipline
(Askesis), and, though the three stages are distinct,
it is impossible to concentrate attention exclusively,
first upon the will and desires, later upon the im-
pulses and actions. Nor could the pupil become
mature in these two lower stages without acquiring
in a great degree that unerring certainty of judg-
ment which it is the especial object of the third
stage to secure. Doubtless the formal separation of
three stages was expedient, not only for the pupil,
but also for his instructor. But the discourses of
the master preserved to us by Arrian are not so
arranged; indeed, in the miscellaneous character of
their contents and the choice of themes suggested by
l
lb., Encheiridion, 51.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 125
trivial incidents or everyday occurrences, and in
the absence of method and order they resemble the
sermons of too many modern preachers. When,
however, we come to take stock of the material so
collected, it is obvious that Epictetus laid the great-
est stress upon the first stage. This was the root of
the whole matter; all subsequent improvement starts
with this. The right attitude consists, first and
foremost, in emancipation from evil passions. This
is its negative side. But Epictetus insists repeatedly
upon the positive side, the rational and permissible
emotions, submission to the divine will, confidence as
regards the future course of events, the peace of
mind, the holy joy and gratitude which accompany
the bringing of the will into harmony with reason.
The second stage is intended to render the agent
blameless and free from offence in all that he is
impelled to do. It translates the inwardness of the
reasonable will into particular resolves, which pro-
duce a multiplicity of external actions. In a hasty
review we shall consider what Epictetus inculcates
respecting duties (i) to self, (2) to God, (3) to one's
neighbour, singling out special points for emphasis
and comparison.
(i) The duties of personal perfection begin with
cleanliness and proper care of the body. The
body is the nearest object to a man, and in dealing
with it he can show his faithfulness in little things.
As far as possible, it must be preserved in its natural
condition. Even in the totally uneducated (Epic-
tetus uses this term to designate what a Christian
teacher would cajl the unregenerate) some attention
to the body is a hopeful sign, as implying something
which the teacher can work upon, "I indeed would
rather/* says Epictetus, "that a young man, when
126 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
first moved to philosophy, should come to me with
his hair carefully trimmed, than with it dirty and
rough. For then he is seen to have a certain notion
ofbeauty and a love ofwhat is becoming; and where
he supposes it to be, there also he strives that it
shall be. It is only necessary to show him what
beauty is and to say, 'Young man, you seek beauty
and you do well; you must know, then, that it springs
up in that part of you where you have the rational
faculty. Seek it there, where you have your im-
pulses to strive for things and to avoid them, where
are your desires and aversions. For this is the
nobler part of yourself, but the poor body is by
nature only clay; why labour about it to no pur-
pose ?>3>1 The whole discourse from which this is
taken has for its subject cleanliness or purity. We
see that the body is a little thing in his eyes, but the
preconception or intuition of beauty is something
which affords a starting-point for the teacher. He
has esteem and sympathy for the career of the
athlete, involving, as it must, endurance of hard-
ship and strict discipline, and justifies the suicide
of the mutilated Olympian victor as the act, not of
an athlete or of a philosopher, but of a man.2
But
he never forgets that the athlete holds a mistaken
view of life; all he does is for the sake of glory and
therefore from the wrong motive.
3
Next come
the duties of temperance, modesty, and chastity.
That a man should be temperate is taken for granted;
there is no need to urge men to nurture the body;
they must rather be warned against pampering
and surfeiting it. On one point, the use of wine,
Stoic opinionwas divided. Some condemned, others
admitted, the use of wine beyond bare needs, and
1
Arriai*, IV, n, 25. */., I, 2, 26. * Ib. t III, 12, 16,
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 127
those who maintained that even in intoxication the
sage would preserve his reason must have condoned
even a generous or undue indulgence. Epictetus
holds the middle position. Sobriety with him is
on the same footing as decency and modesty. That
he should allow any drinking beyond natural neces-
sity must be explained by the Stoic principle of ac-
commodating or adapting one's self to established
custom in social intercourse. Chastity is dealt with
in the thirty-third section of the Enchezridion. The
demands there made, if they do not in some points
quite satisfy the Christian standard, are far in ad-
vance of the conventional code of the world either of
his or of our own day. That the teacher should
cherish a pure affection for a promising pupil capable
of moral improvement -was a survival, we may say,
from old Greek habits and associations. In various
passages it is recognised by Epictetus, but he does
not call this zeal for education by the invidious
name of love, nor does he regard it as associated
with personal beauty in the pupil; and as to the
purity of his regard there is absolutely no question.
The retention ofthe old term love under these altered
circumstances exposed the Stoics to the taunt that
they loved men when at their ugliest, because desti-
tute of moral beauty, and ceased to love them when
by education they had attained to true beauty.
It would be just as unfair to taunt the modern
missionary with his enthusiastic zeal for the con-
version of very unattractive heathen. The fruit
of philosophy is the extirpation of the passion
for sensual beauty and the cultivation of the love
of moral beauty. Sexual love was, as Seneca de-
fined it, insana amicitia^ and Musonius courageously
demands from men the same self-control as even
128 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
in his day men demanded from women. That
Epictetus himself was no stranger to the passion
may be inferred from a curious remark on the love
of philosophy: "If any one among you has been
in love with a charming girl, he knows that what I
say is true."
l
His language often reminds us of the
sermon on the mount.
2 The subject of the fourth
discourse of the second Book is an outspoken de-
nunciation of an adulterer who had the audacity
to -present himself at a lecture. "How shall I con-
sider you, man ? As a neighbour, as a friend ?
What kind of one ? As a citizen ? Wherein shall I
trust you ? So if you were an utensil, so worthless,
that no one could use you, you would be pitched
out on to the dung heaps, and no man would pick
you up. But if, being a man, you are unable^ to
fill any place which befits a man, what is to be
done with you ? For suppose that you cannot
hold the place ofa friend, can you hold the place of a
slave ? And who will trust you ? Must not you
also submit to be thrown on a dung heap as a use-
less utensil?" With this scathing rebuke compare
St. Matthew, V, I3.
8
The importance he attached to decency, personal
dignity, modesty, and propriety led him to discounte-
nance gossip and idle talk, and the novice is recom-
mended to maintain a discreet silence in society,
unless he can turn the conversation to serious
themes.
4
A passive, almost quietistic demeanour
toward the external goods of life is inculcated, quite
distinct from any tendency to asceticism. He lays
down no such rules about dress as Musonius did, nor
1
Arrian, III, 5, 19.
*
Cf. Arrian, II, 18, 15, with St. Matthew, V, 28.
8
Cf. also Arrian, III, 7, 21; II, 8, 13.
* Encheiridiont 33.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 129
was he, like him, a vegetarian. Musonius was far
removed from Diogenes, and Epictetus still further.
At the same time Epictetus was too fond of de-
nouncing as effeminate luxury whatever exceeds
simplicity. With the luxuries he rejects all the com-
forts of life, even a cushion, and it is odd that he
should recommend the simplest furniture on the
ground that anything beyond this might be a tempta-
tion, either to ourselves or to others, to steal. Nor
is this extreme simplicity altogether consistent with
passages in which servants, the use ofwine, and the
enjoyment of objects of art are permitted. Be-
sides, he is quite clear that asceticism in any form
is only a means to an end, a discipline to secure
moral freedom, relatively necessary, but not in itself
an essential phase of the moral life. To personal
example he attributes more influence than to all
doctrine. For this reason the ideal preacher or
missionary, whom he calls the Cynic, occupies an
exceptional position. His extreme asceticism is
not a pattern for general imitation, but is practised
as an extraordinary means for the improvement of
the masses, just -as total abstinence is by some advo-
cated to-day in the cause of social reform. Epic-
tetus is quite convinced thatwe must not plume our-
selves on moderation and abstinence, and that the
moral life is just as possible amid external splendour
as in poverty. Veracity is conditioned by loyalty,
openness, and candour, which were always Stoic
ideals. In one passage the Stoic convert is forbid-
den to take an oath, so far as he can avoid it.
1
The
ancient commentator, Simplicius, attributed this pro-
hibition to religious grounds, because it dishon-
ours God to call Him to witness for trivial things.
1
Arrian, Encheiridion, 33.
130 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
More probably the prohibition is founded on the
high importance attached to veracity. If veracity
is implicit, the oath is unnecessary, and we are re-
minded of the usage of the Quakers with its appeal
to the Gospel precept: "Let your Yea be Yea and
your Nay, Nay/' It is a well-worn question of
casuistry whether the truth must under all circum-
stances be spoken. The Stoics permitted the neces-
sary lie, if it be for the good of our neighbours.
Epictetus insists strongly on the dignity of labour.
Earn your own living, he says; be independent.
No employment is unworthy of the sage; manual
toil is as honourable as statesmanship. A life of
unemployed leisure is as bad as a life of ambition
and the greedy pursuit of office. Such a pronounce-
ment is all the more refreshing because it runs
counter to a rooted prejudice of the Greek mind.
Manual toil in Homer is honourable, but, as the
Greeks advanced in civilisation during historical
times, they came to despise both industrial and
agricultural labour. The occupations which had once
been consigned to slaves were no longer regarded as
fit for free men.
1
That this prejudice was shared by
the heterodox Stoic Panaetius is clear from Cicero's
treatise De Officiis, and it is greatly to the credit of
the humble slave of Hierapolis that he returned to
the sounder views indorsed by the Semitic founder
of his school. Economic independence, then, is
incumbent on every one's honour. But there are
difficulties and pitfalls even here. Wealth has its
value in the class of things preferred. That being
1 Even more remarkable is the trace which this prejudice has left in
the Greek language. Thus the adjective Poneros, which originally
meant toilsome, laborious, changed its meaning to that of bad and evil,
or even wicked in themodern sense.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 131
so, the duty of adding to one's wealth is clear, pro-
vided no moral interest be sacrificed; and to squander
money Is as wrong as to squander health. The
acquisition of riches cannot be justified by the mo-
tive of benevolence, by the prospect of being able to
help one's friend or one's country; for the merit of
doing one's duty is not enhanced by large pos-
sessions;
1
witness the widow's mite of the Gospel.
Set not your heart on riches is the precept of Epic-
tetus. All exertion for external things is repre-
hensible, if the object sought is treated as an end
in itself instead of a means to the moral life, if it be
pursued for the sake of external success rather than
as an outlet for mental activity. As things are,
Epictetus recognises that the gain ofwealth generally
means the loss ofmodesty, fidelity, and magnanimity.
His sentiments on the pursuit of worldly honours
and of wealth are frankly stated in a passage of the
Encheiridion as follows: "Let not these thoughts
afflict you. I shall live unhonoured and be nobody
and nowhere. For if want of honour is an evil,
you cannot be in evil through the fault of another,
any more than you can be involved in anything base.
Is it then your business to obtain the rank of a magis-
trate or to be received at a banquet ? By no means.
How, then, can this be want of honour ? And how
will you be nobody and nowhere, when you ought
to be somebody in those things only which are in
your power, in which, indeed, it is permitted to you
to be a man ofthe greatest worth ? But your friends
will be without assistance! What do you mean by
being without assistance ? They will not receive
money from you nor will you make them Roman
citizens. Who, then, told you that these are among
1
Encheiridion, 24.
132 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the things which are in our power and not in the
power ofothers ? And who can give to another what
he has not himself? Acquire money then, your
friends say, that we also may have something. If I
can acquire money, and also keep myselfmodest and
faithful and magnanimous, point out the way and I
will acquire it. But ifyou ask me to lose the things
which are good and my own, in order that you may
gain the things which are not good, see how unfair
and silly you are. Besides, which would you rather
have, money or a faithful and modest friend ? For
this end, then, rather help me to be such a man, and
do not ask me to do that by which I shall lose this
character. But my country, you say, so far as it
depends on me, will be without my help. I ask
again, what help do you mean? It will not have
porticoes or baths through you. And what does
this mean ? For it is not furnished with shoes by
means of a smith nor with arms by means of a
shoemaker. But it is enough if every man fully
discharges the work that is his own; and if you
provided it with another citizen, faithful and modest,
would you not be useful to it? Yes. Then you,
also, cannot be useless to it. What place, then, you
say, shall I hold in the city ? Whatever you can, if
you maintain at the same time your fidelity and
modesty. But if when you wish to be useful to the
state you shall lose these qualities, what profit
could you be to it ifyou were made shameless and
faithless?"
1
(2) Since all moral action may be summed up
in the formula "to reverence God, imitate Him and
obey Him," the term "duty to God" must be re-
stricted to acts of worship and religious observance.
1
Encheiridion, 24.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 133
"As to piety toward the gods," says Epictetus,
"you must know that this is the chief thing, to have
right opinions about them, to think that they exist,
a-nd that they administer the All well and justly;
and- you must fix yourself in this principle, to obey
them and to yield to them in everything which hap-
pens, and voluntarily to follow it as being accom-
plished by the wisest intelligence. For ifyou do so,
you will never either blame the gods, nor will you
accuse them of neglecting you. And it is not pos-
sible for this to be done in any other way than by
withdrawing from the things which are not in our
power, and by placing the good and the evil in those
things only which are in our power. He who takes
care to desire as he ought and to avoid as he ought,
by so doing also takes care to be pious. But to
make libations and to sacrifice, and to offer first
fruits according to the custom of our fathers, purely
and not meanly nor carelessly, nor scantily, nor
above our ability, is a thing which belongs to all
to do/'
1
It will presently be seen how closely the Stoic con-
ception of true piety agrees in the main with the
viewsofthe opposite school as laid down byEpicurus,
2
subject, of course, to the fundamental divergence
of opinion which must always exist between two
schools, when one affirms and the other denies a
moral purpose in the government of the universe.
Epictetus insists before all things upon right convic-
tions. He believes that some dogmas are necessary
to religion. In the next place, the outcome of these
views is submission to the divine will and the course
of Providence. No one but the sage is capable
of this; he alone knows the true value of things,
1
Enchemdion, 31.
2
Cf. pp. 168, 172, 200, 289, 298.
134 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
and impiety in a greater or less degree is inevitable
in those who have not this knowledge. When these
great results are secured, the external manifestations
of piety follow as a matter of course, in accordance
with the use and ritual of our fathers, /. <?., of the par-
ticular society into which we are born, but it must
always be with sincerity. Epictetus was no innov-
ator. He accepted from the popular religion the
whole of its cultus as well as divination. But cults
and ritual are only valuable to him when they pro-
ceed from right convictions and inward piety. So
far from recommending compliance as a concession
to human weakness,
1
he held that none but the wise
man could perform the external acts properly. What-
ever the views held by earlier Stoics, it is not true of
Epictetus that he did not share the beliefs of the
multitude.
2
He continually attacks the godless
Epicureans and the Sceptics of the Academy be-
cause, by their teaching, popular morality, patriotism
and the love of truth were undermined. He could
not make this a reproach against them, if he himself
shared their views. On the contrary, like the fear-
less, fanatical dogmatist he was, he could only ex-
plain the stand-point of his opponents by their moral
degeneracy. They had cast offand deadened shame,
and therefore their -philosophy was all frivolity and
their teaching frigid subtleties. "Grateful, indeed,
and modest are men who, if they do nothing else,
are daily eating bread, and yet are shameless enough
to say, We do not know if there is a Ceres or her
daughter Proserpine or a Pluto." 3 Such is his in-
1
Zeller, Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics, c, XIII.
3
Zeller, 7&.; also Hirzel, Untersuchungen, II, p. 878, with especial
reference to the attitude of Polybius the historian to the popular faith.
3
Arrian, III, 20, 32.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 135
dignant protest: could it have found expression if he
had not shared the beliefs of the multitude ?
But how, it may be asked, is the polytheism
of the national faith to be reconciled with the many
pantheistic and even monotheistic utterances so com-
mon in Epictetus ? Itmay be remarked that, though
he uses God in the singular and gods in the plural
indifferently, the singular predominates, and we
may conclude that the plural form implies a single
force, a single will, which in truth surrenders
polytheism. Moreover, Zeus alone is eternal. He
is the father ofgods as well as men; the other deities
are transitory. He has created them and assigned
them their several spheres of operation. He uses
them as ministers and co-regents. They execute
His will and no more prejudice His omnipotence than
the angels of Judaism and Christianity. Zeus is
primitive substance which has produced all the
other divinities. They are the first creation at the
end of every cosmical epoch, and so Epictetus is
entitled to use the plural. Zeus is omnipotent;
there are no limits to His sovereignty. On this
point Epictetus often recalls the Old Testament, e. g*9
Psalm CIV, Isaiah, XLV. "When asked how a
man could be convinced that all his actions are done
in the sight of God, he answered, Do you not think
that all things are united in one ? I do,was the reply.
Well, do you not think that things on earth have a
natural agreement and union with things in heaven ?
I do. And how else so regularly as if by God*s
command, when He bids the plants to flower, do
they flower ? How is it that when He bids them to
send forth shoots, they shoot; when He bids them
to bear fruit, they bear fruit; when He bids the
fruit to ripen, it ripens; when again He bids them
136 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
drop their fruit, they drop it; when He bids them
shed their leaves, they shed their leaves; and when
He bids them fold themselves up and remain quiet
and at rest, they remain <juiet and at rest?"
l
The
tendency to a monotheistic conception becomes
clearer when the other attributes of God, omni-
presence and omniscience, are considered. We have
seen that God is everywhere. Because He is every-
where no thought is hidden from Him.2 And yet
this spiritual being is not pronounced immaterial,
though His substance is the finest and the purest
ether. Physical purity, mental strength, and moral
goodness always go together for Epictetus, as for the
rest of his school. That pantheism should occasion-
allyemploy monotheistic expressions is not more sur-
prising in Epictetus than in Cleanthes.
A further objection must be stated. Since ex-
ternal things are of secondary importance, is it not
inconsistent to pray for them ? And, since the only
true good is in man's own power to procure, is not
prayer for it unnecessary ? May it not be argued in
like manner that all acts ofworship are at most sym-
bolical ? How else except as a symbol could sheaves
and cattle be offered to a spiritual being ? Is not a
song of thankfulness in the heart and admiration
of His works sufficient worship ? Seneca is very
outspoken
3
and declares all religious observances
futile. But the wise man will observe them in the
interests of civil law and order, and justify them as
symbolical expressions of a pious frame of mind.
Seneca also holds that the gods have left some
things in suspense to be prayed for. Prayers are
offered, not to compel the gods to help, but to remind
1
Arrian, I, 14, I sqq.
2
/6., I, 14* i; II, 14, n-
*Epist. 41, i; Nat, Qwest, ii. 35, i.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 137
them of human circumstances. This reminder has
subjective not objective value. Man is his own
accuser, his own judge, his own intercessor and
pardoner, in foro conscientice. But Epictetus, in
upholding the popular faith, had the authority of
his master, Musonius,who evenrecommended prayer
for external goods. With this we may compare
Marcus Aurelius: "An Athenian prayer, 'Rain, rain,
dear Zeus, upon Athenian tilth and plains/ We
should either not pray at all or else in this simple,
noble sort."
l
Marcus Aurelius speaks of "sacrifice
and prayer and oaths and all other observances by
which we own the presence and the nearness of the
gods."
2 True obedience to God, he holds, con-
sists in obedience to His law. "Live with the gods.
And he lives with the gods who ever presents to them
his soul accepting their dispensations and busied
aboutthe will ofGod, even that particle ofZeuswhich
Zeus gives to every man for his controller and gov-
ernor to wit, his mind and reason." 3 Like Seneca,
he would have us pray chiefly forwhat is really good,
for emancipation from evil passions, and the like. His
own prayerfulness is attested by his words: "Solace
your departure with the reflection: <I am leaving
a life in which my own associates, for whom I have
so striven, prayed, and thought, themselves wish
for my removal, their hope being that they will
perchance gain something in freedom thereby/"
*
(3) It has already been said that social duties
rest upon our relationships to others, either born
with the individual or voluntarily entered upon by
him. First come the family relationships. The
day had long been past when they were open to
1 Marcus Aurelius, V, 7.
2
15-, VI, 44.
3
15., V, 27.
4
Z&.,X, 36.
138 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
serious discussion. The founders of the school
had, indeed, raised the question whether nature
invariably intended mankind for monogamy and
separate family life, or whether, in a higher state,
community of wives and children was not reason's
more perfect way. But the question even then was
purely theoretical and had no practical consequences.
By the later Stoics, at any rate, the monogamic
family was accepted and upheld as the natural
basis of existing society. Accordingly, marriage
and the rearing of families were encouraged as in
strict conformity with reason.
1
Epictetus allows a
special dispensation in the case of hi& ideal mis-
sionary' or Cynic, but he will remain unmarried
solely in order that he may be unimpeded in his
arduous task.
2
Besides insisting on the primary
duty of fidelity in both husband and wife, the later
Stoicswere much interested in the position ofwomen.
Musonius did not wish men and women to have the
same occupations: but he defended the right of
women to education, and was even anxious that
girls should be taught philosophy. The objections
to this proposal he met with arguments much the
same as those at present urged by the advocates of
female education.
3
He was, of course, thinking pri-
marily of moral education, and he refused to allow
that, if his principles were consistently carried out,
women would be taught athletics and men spinning.
In all that concerns morality he firmly maintained
the equality of the sexes, and his disciple, Epictetus,
also seems to countenance the education of girls.
Seneca dwells with appreciation on the heroic deeds
of women,
4 and even in his keen criticism of the
1
Arrian, III, 7, 26. 2
/&., Ill, 22, 67.
3
Stobaeus, Ecloga 235 sqq., 244 sqq. (W.).
* Ad Helvlam, 19, 5.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 139
women of his own time/ he is anxious to uphold an
ideal of thatwomanly excellence ofwhich his mother,
Helvia, his wife, Paulina, and Marcia, the daughter
of Cremutius Cordus, were types. The love of
parents for their offspring was an ordinance of
nature, and Epictetus sarcastically observes that the
parents of Epicurus would not have disowned him
even if they had foreseen the principles their son
would afterward advocate. And again he argues
that if parental love had not been founded in nature,
Epicurus would not have taken such pains to dis-
suade men from marriage and family life. Epic-
tetus requires unlimited obedience of children in all
matters indifferent, irrespective of the character of
the parent. Nothing short of a command to do
something which is immoral justifies the child in
disobeying. His conception of these elementary
duties can be gathered from the following: "After
this, remember that you are a son. What does this
character promise? To consider that everything
which is the son's belongs to the father, to obey him
in all things, never to blame him to another nor to
say or do anything which does him injury, to yield
to him in all things and give way, co-operating with
him as far as you can. After this, know that you
are a brother, also, and that to this character it is
due to make concessions; to be easily persuaded,
to speak good of your brother, never to claim in
opposition to him any of the things which are inde-
pendent of the will, but readily to give them up
thatyou may have the larger share in what is depen-
dent on the will. For see what a thing it is, in place
of a lettuce, if it should so happen, or a seat, to gain
for yourself goodness of disposition. How great is
1
.
g., Ad Helviam, 17, 4.
140 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the advantage."
1
That these were not mere copy-
book maxims, but that under favourable circum-
stances they bore excellent fruit, may be seen from
the touching way in which the Stoic emperor grate-
fully reviews all that he conceives himself to have
owed to his father, mother, and brother.
2
As regards civic duties, the position of the Stoics
was peculiar. They were at once conservative and
radical. Patriotism, they maintained, and active
participation in public life is a duty which has its
foundation in human nature. But the duty is con-
ditioned by the assumption that external circum-
stances conform to reason, which, as a matter of
fact, they seldom do. Hence, whether they did or
did not take part in civil affairs, they were open to
the reproach of inconsistency. Seneca urges that
when they draw back, ,it is not that they shrink
from the trouble of political activity, but thatthey fear
to lose their self-respect owing to the corruption of
the times. No doubt the excuse was often abused,
but it comes strangely from the minister of Nero,
who cannot escape all responsibility for some of
that tyrant's worst crimes. Plutarch, on the other
hand, holds that the greater inconsistency is for the
Stoic to engage in public affairs at all.
3
That the
first founders of the school, Zeno, Cleanthes, and
Chrysippus, should have taken no part in political
life admits of easy explanation. They were foreign
residents at Athens, and not Athenian citizens, and
Seneca is entitled to claim for them that by their
career as teachers they effected far greater good
than they could have done by holding any public
offices. But it is idle to deny that cosmopolitanism
1
Arrian, II, 10, 7.
2 Marcus Aurelius, I, 2, 3, 14, 16, 17.
3
Plutarch, De Stoicorum Repugnantiis, c. 3,
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 141
is, in the long run, incompatible with a restricted
patriotism. The idea of a man's discharging his
human mission only as a member ofsome one nation
or state, the idea which dominated Rome, and was
the source at once of her strength and her weakness,
was foreign to Stoicism. The condition of existing
states, even of the Roman empire, was so far from
his ideal that the Stoic could not serve in any of
them with honest enthusiasm. Besides, his depre-
ciation of external goods hindered him from bringing
real interest to bear on the economic and progressive
tasks of any community, Nevertheless, though in-
consistently, the Stoics defended patriotism and the
duty of altruistic effort, and enjoined on magis-
trates faithful and conscientious care for the common
good. This duty is especially emphasised by Marcus
Aurelius, whose example far outweighed his pre-
cepts, for he wore himselfout in the toils andlabours
of his imperial office. Epictetus holds that faithful
service in public office is a natural instinct, which
man can no more resist than the instinct to love and
care for his children. Man is, by nature, adapted
and inclined for society and the formation of fellow-
ships and work for the common goo'd. He himself
would like to die while performing some noble and
beneficent service of public utility. He thus ex-
plains his conception of citizenship: "It is to have
no selfish private interest, to deliberate about nothing
as if he were detached from the rest, but to act as
the hand or foot would do if they had reason and
could obey the arrangements of nature, for they
would have no desire, no impulse which had not
reference to the whole."
t
This ideal temper made
the Stoic a quiet and harmless citizen.
1
Arrian, II, 10, 4.
142 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
War was_iiniversally condemned; it was always
the result of blindness and infatuation. Musonius
nearly lost his life by his courageous interposition in
the last stage of the civil conflict between Vitellius
and Vespasian, when he harangued the troops on
both sides on the duty of concord, the blessings of
peace, and the horror of war.
1
Epictetus did not
go so far as this, but he lectured a procurator of
Epirus for his partisanship, and for the bad example
he set his inferiors, in very outspoken terms.
2
Another official he boldly confronts thus: "'But/
said the official, 'I can throw into prison any one
whom I please/ 'So you can do with a stone/
'But I can beat with rods any one I please/ 'So
you may an ass. This is not to govern men. Gov-
ern us as rational animals. Show us what is profit-
able to us and we will follow it. Show us what is un-
profitable and we will turn away from it. Make us
imitators of yourself, as Socrates did/"
3
Seneca pro-
claims that the ruler's best safeguard is the love of
his subjects.
4
As with magistrates, so with laws.
The Stoic was irresistibly impelled to measure his
reverence for existing laws by the degree to which
they approximate to law universal.
The last and highest social duties are founded on
the most universal relation, that of the individual
man to his fellow-men. Every human being is a
member of a rational system, an all-embracing com-
monwealth, the city of Zeus, the community of gods
and men. It is to this, primarily, that he owes
allegiance, and the isolated communities which pass
for states are only imperfect and reduced copies of it.
Hence, cosmopolitanism becomes philanthropy and
1
Tacitus, History, III, 81. 3
Arrian, III, 4, 5.
8
Ib., Ill, 7, 32-
*
Seneca, De dementia, I, 19, 6.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 143
civic duties are merged in those of humanity. Such
a conception, besides abolishing the national dis-
tinction between Greek and barbarian, brings us face
to face with the institution of slavery, which has been
in every age the main obstacle to the recognition of a
common humanity. From the principles that the
wise alone are free and immoral persons slaves, and
that all external things are indifferent, it follows
directly that the institution is indefensible. There
can be no real difference between bond and free.
Epictetus clearly teaches that all men have God for
their father and are by nature brothers. To the
question: How can one endure such a person as
this slave ? he replies: "Slave that you are yourself,
will you not bear with your own brother, who has
Zeus for his progenitor, and is like a son from the
same seeds and of the same descent from above ?
But if you have been put in any such higher place,
will you immediately make yourself a tyrant ? Will
you not remember who you are and whom you rule ?
that they are kinsmen, that they are brethren by
nature, that they are the offspring of Zeus ?
*
But
I have purchased them and they have not purchased
me/ Do you see in what direction you are look-
ing, that it is toward the earth, toward the pit, that
it is toward these wretched laws of dead men ? But
toward the laws of the gods you are not looking/*
1
Slavery, then, is a law of the dead. It affects the
body alone; the mind of the slave is free.2 No man
can make another either slave or free. " I have con-
sidered all these matters/* says Epictetus, addressing
an imaginary master; "no man has power over me.
I have been made free by God; I know His com-
mands; no man can now lead me as a slave. I have
1
Arrian, I, 13, 5.
2
Seneca, De Beneficiis, HI, ao, i.
144 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
a proper person to assert my freedom; I have
proper judges. Are you not the master ofmy body ?
What, then, is that to me ? Are you not the master
of my property ? What, then, is that to me ? Are
you not the master of my exile or of my chains ?
Well, from all these things, and all the poor body
itself, I depart at your bidding, when you please.
Make trial of your power, and you will know how
far it reaches/'
1
Again: "Zeus has set me free;
do you think that He intended His own son to be
enslaved ? But you are master ofmy carcass; take
it. 'So, when you approach me, you have no re-
gard to me?
3
No, but I have regard to myself;
and if you wish me to say that I have regard to you
also, I tell you that I have the same regard to you
that I have to my porringer."
2 Seneca often says
the slave is capable of virtue and worthy of the
friendship of the free.
8
He can bestow a benefit on
his master, for the merit of the service depends upon
the intention, not upon the external condition.
4
The
Roman gradation of ranks: knights, freedmen,
slaves, he maintains to be only empty names
sprung of ambition and wrong.
5
Any one can be
ennobled by overcoming what is low and common.
6
In principle, then, the Stoics had surmounted sla-
very, but they did not press forward and work for
its complete abolition any more than the Christians
of the first century. When the end of the world was
deemed so close at hand, wide social changes seemed
to the Christians unnecessary, and there was force in
the Apostle's precept: "Wast thou called being a
bond-servant ? care not for it; but if thou canst be-
1
Arrian, IV, 7, 16. a
Ib., I, 19, 9.
3
Seneca, De Ben., Ill, 18, 2; Ep., 31, n.
4
/&., De Ben.y III, 28, i. 5
Seneca, Ep., 31, n. eDe Ben,, III, 28.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 145
come free, use it," i.e., slavery, "rather. For he
that was called in the Lord, being a bond-servant, is
the Lord's freedman; likewise, he that was called
being free is Christ's bond-servant. Ye were bought
with a price; become not bond-servants of men/'
1
So, too, the Stoics were most anxious that the slave
should attain to true inward freedom and escape the
moral slavery to vice and evil passions. The ame-
lioration of his external lot, being a thing indiffer-
ent, was of secondary importance. No doubt many
slaves profited directly by the humanity of Stoic
masters, but it was long before these humane prin-
ciples, permeating society, had the indirect conse-
quence ofgradually raising the slave to the improved
position of the serf. This great change, which .was
not completed at the break-up of the Roman em-
pire, is ascribed by Lecky to Stoic rather than
Christian influences.^
Butwhat are the duties which I owe to my fellow-
men? First, there are the passive duties, not to
requite evil with evil, patiently to suffer all wrong
and insult, and repress all movements of hate, re-
venge, anger, and envy. "To suppose thatwe shall
be easily despised by others," says Epictetus, "un-
less in every possible way we do injury to those who
first show us hostility, is the mark of very ignoble
and foolish men; for this implies that inability to
do injury is the reason why we are thought con-
temptible, whereas, the really contemptible man is
not he who cannot do injury but he who cannot do
benefit."
2 The best revenge is to show ourselves
blameless and, if possible, improve the evil-doer.
"To take the insult coolly," says Seneca, "is in some
1 1 Cor., 7 : 21-23.
*Arrian, Fragment 70 (Schweighauser).
146 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
sort to be revenged."
l
Marcus Aurelius, again,
says: "Not to do likewise is the best revenge."
2
Epictetus does not strictly forbid the attempt to get
legal satisfaction for our wrongs, though he dis-
courages it by remarking that we ought to be thank-
ful we were not worse treated, but escaped with our
lives.
3
Ifwe do go into court, we should be neither
cowardly nor arrogant, neither descend to unworthy
appeals nor irritate and challenge the judge un-
necessarily.
4
But the same Stoics who thus de-
manded patience under wrong refused to allow
compassion and pardon, and stoutly opposed any
interference with the course of justice by remission
of penalty. Critics profess to discover an incon-
sistency in this. But they fail to put themselves in
the position of the Stoic; they overlook the doctrine
of apathy. If once it be granted that no morbid
emotion can ever be indulged by the sage, and that
pity is morbid emotion, a form of grief or mental
pain, it is hard to see why the sight ofothers' misfor-
tunes should be an excuse for this particular form of
vice. Theywere nothard-hearted, buttheygrounded
the impulse to help and save, not upon pity, but upon
the tie of a common humanity, the knowledge ofthe
rights and duties in which all men share. The sage
will be patient with the suffering, not because oftheir
external woes, but because of their inward weakness
and blindness.
As with pity, so with forgiveness. The senti-
mentalist exclaims: "How inhuman! Is not pardon
the noblest prerogative ofman ?" and falls to quoting:
"The quality ofmercy is not strained," etc. But the
Stoic also pardons in his own way. Ifhe is wronged
1De Constantia Sapientis, 17, n.
"Marcus Aurelius, VI, 6. 3
Arrian, TV", 5, 9. */&., II, 2, 17.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 147
or insulted, he does not take it ill, does not allow him-
self to give way to anger or resentment, but attributes
the act to human weakness and folly. He does not
consider that he is wronged or insulted, but thinks
the wicked man has done the greater harm to him-
self and has received his punishment in the loss of
self-esteem, which always accompanies sin.
1
He is
not concerned for his own personal honour, but only
for the improvement of the evildoer; and if the latter
repents and is willing to make friends, he is quite
ready to meet him. This tolerant attitude toward
human infirmity is abundantly illustrated by Marcus
Aurelius. He is always ready with excuses for oth-
ers. "Cruel, is it not, to prevent men from push-
ing for what looks like their own advantage ? Yet
in a sense you forbid them that when you resent
their going wrong. They are doubtless bent upon
their own objects and advantage. "Not so/ you say,
'in reality/ Teach them so, then, and prove it,
instead of resenting it." 2 "When any one does you
a wrong, set yourself at once to consider what was
the point of view, good or bad, that led him wrong.
As soon as you perceive it you will be sorry for him,
not surprised or angry. For your own view ofgood
is either the same as his or something like in kind,
and you will make allowance. Or, supposing your
own view ofgood and bad has altered, you will find
charity for his mistake come easier." 3 "Whom-
soever you meet, say straightway to yourself: What
are the man's principles of good and bad ? For ifhe
holds such and such principles regarding pleasure
and pain and their respective causes, about fame
and shame, or life and death, I shall not be surprised
or shocked at his doing such and such things; I
1Marcus Aurelius, IX, 4-
2
&* VI, 37,
B
16., VII, 26.
148 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
shall remember that he cannot do otherwise."
l
"When offended at a fault in some one else, divert
your thoughts to the reflection, What is the parallel
fault inme ? Is it attachment to money ? or pleasure ?
or reputation ? as the case may be. Dwelling on this,
anger forgets itself and makes way for the thought:
'He cannot help himself; what else can he do? If
it is not so, enable him, ifyou can, to help himself/" 2
In Epictetus, again, we find the following: "When
any person treats you ill or speaks ill ofyou, remem-
ber that he does this or says this because he thinks
that it is his duty. It is not possible, then, for him
to follow that which seems right to you but that
which seems right to himself. Accordingly, if he is
wrong in his opinion, he is the person who is hurt,
for he is the person who has been deceived; for if a
man shall suppose the true proposition to be false, it
is not the proposition which is hindered but the
manwho has been deceived about it. Ifyou proceed,
then, from these opinions you will be mild in temper
to him who reviles you; for say on each occasion:
It seemed so to him."
3
On the question of punishment, again, the line
taken by the Stoic is intelligible and consistent. If
he is convinced that in the interests of public order
and of the wrong-doer himself punishment is neces-
sary, he knows no forgiveness. He will not let the
offender off on account of weak pity. For to remit
the penalty under these circumstances would be to
pronounce the original infliction of the punishment
unjust. That violations of law must be punished
was always energetically maintained by the school.
They insisted, however, that the punishment should
1 Marcus Aurelius, VIII, 14.
*
/&-, X, 30.
*
Arrian, Encheiridion, 42.
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS 149
be dictated, not by anger, but by mature deliberation.
It should aim at the reclamation of the offender, and,
in order to this end, as well as to act as a sufficient
deterrent, it should be both as mild, as speedy, and
as certain as possible. The death penalty cuts off
the absolutely bad as excrescences upon the body
politic.
1
But, while the Stoic refusal to pardon or
remit penalties can be fully justified against all weak
sentimentality, it must be allowed that they did not
take sufficient account of the possibility of error,
either (a) as to the guilt or innocence of the accused
or (&) as to the extent of his guilt. From Seneca's
treatise on Clemency it can plainly be seen that they
strove to find the correct mean between cruel harsh-
ness and strictness on the one hand, and weak in-
dulgence on the other. Clemency, according to
Seneca, is neither weak indulgence nor yet morbid
pity. One might be tempted to object that this is a
mere verbal quibble, and that he who makes clem-
ency his principle acts in the same way as he who
pardons, but from higher motives and with clearer
insight. Seneca's conclusion is, briefly, that perfect
justice is also the highest and most perfect love. In
holding such a view as this, far from being harsh, he
was well in advance of his own time it may be, of
ours.
1 Seneca is here our chief authority, especially the treatisesDe Ira and
De dementia. "iBonis nocet qui malis parcit" (Fragment 114) is the
key-note of his remarks. In meting out punishment, regard must be had
to mildness, as far as possible (De Ira, I, 19; De dementia, I, 2, 2; I,
5, i), not to the satisfaction of rage or revenge (De Ira, I, 12; I, 6; I,
15). The mildest punishment is the most effective for reformation (De
dementia, I, 22). The death penalty should not be unduly deferred
(De Ben.t II, 5, i)- Cicero, Pro Murena, cc. 29-31, , 60-66, does his
best to ridicule the Stoics in general, and Cato in particular, for what
he considers their Impracticably rigid adherence to fixed principles on
this matter.
150 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
To Epictetus the active duty of benevolence and
readiness to help others is an essential part of
morality, the highest manifestation of rational will.
Marcus Aurelius expresses the same thought thus:
"Does the eye demand a recompense for seeing, or
the feet for walking ? Just as this is the end for
which they exist, and just as they find their reward in
realising the law of their being, so, too, man is made
for kindness, and whenever he does an act of kind-
ness or otherwise helps forward the common good,
he thereby fulfils the law of his being and comes by
his own/'
l
"Nature/
5
says Seneca, "bids me be of
use to men, no matter whether they are slave or free,
freedmen or free-born. Wherever there is a human
being there is room for benevolence."
2
Persistent
kindness conquers the bad, and no one is so hard-
hearted, so hostile to what he should value, that even
to his own hurt he refuses to love good men.
3
We are
required to love men genuinely, and from the heart.
4
"Make the most of a short life," says Seneca; "let it
be peaceful both for yourself and others. See that
you are beloved by all while you live and regretted
when you die."
5
This help and service was inter-
preted to mean, not merely external aid, but the
effort to teach, admonish, and reform others, a task
beset with difficulties, calling for tact and even tem-
per, and the gift of sweet reasonableness. That we
must love the sinner and try earnestly to improve
him is a favourite thought of the Stoic emperor.
"It is man's special gift to love even those who fall
into blunders; this takes effect the momentwe realise
1
Marcus Aurelius, IX, 42, s* /.
a
Seneca, De Vita Beata, 24, 3,
8
16., De Ben., VII, 31, i.
4Marcus Aurelius, VII, 13; Seneca, De Ira, III, 28, i sq.
*Delra, III, 43, i-
TEACHING OF THE LATER STOICS* 151
thatmen are our brothers, that sin is ofignorance and
unintentional, that in a little while we shall both be
dead, that, above all, no injury is done us; our inner
self is not made worse than it was before/'
1
"Use
your moral reason to move his; show him his error,
admonish him/* 2 "Ifyou can, set the doer right/'
3
"Men exist for one another. Teach them, then, or
bear with them/'
4
"Convert men, if you can; if
you cannot, charity, remember, has been given you
for this end. See ! the gods, too, have charity for such,
helping them to divers things, health, wealth, and
reputation; so good are they. You, too, can do the
same; who hinders you ?"
5
"If a man is mistaken,
reason with him kindly and point out his miscon-
ception. If you fail, blame yourself or no one/' 6
"Reverence the gods, help men/' 7 In the face of
this evidence it would be blind prejudice to deny
that the Stoics preached philanthropy in its highest
and noblest form. But it would be unfair to ignore
the fact that itwas not the centre oftheir view of life,
as it is in Christianity, or that it lacked the force,
warmth, and influence which a deeper conviction of
sin and the conception of self-sacrificing love lend
to the teaching of the New Testament. However
willing to serve and help his fellows, the Stoic never
forgets that vice is folly, and can hardly repress a
smile at the human comedy, the follies, errors, and
blunders of mankind.
From this imperfect sketch it appears that the
later Stoics, and especially Epictetus, in their prac-
tical teaching adhered firmly to the principles laid
down by Zeno. The system of morality which they
enforced by precept and example possessed consid-
1Marcus Aurelius, VII, 22. 3
/&., V, 28. 3
75., VIII, 17.
* ib.f viii, 59.
5
ib., ix, ii. n>., x, 4.
7
/&., x, 3o.
152 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
erable merits which no inquirer can afford to dis-
regard. In this system happiness depends solely on
the will, and the value of an act is estimated by the
intention; vice or sin is misery and carries its own
punishment with it; virtue consists, not in perform-
ing such and such actions, but rather in the right
view of life, the attitude in shaping the whole of
conduct in conformity with right reason or which
comes to the same thing with God's will; nothing
external can dishonour a man, and the true nobility
of virtue is within the reach of the slave. These and
other kindred doctrines can all be traced to the ten-
dency of the system to regard morality as an affair
of the inner life in short, to the inwardness of
Stoicism.
CHAPTER V
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM
Epicurus was an Athenian citizen and belonged to
the deme Gargettus. Hence he is often called the
The few simple facts and dates of
his uneventful career as a teacher and writer are par-
ticularly well established. He was born in the year
341 B. C., in the lunar month Gamelion, the tenth
day of which was kept in his honour. Probably it
was three days earlier, on the seventh of the month,
that he first saw the light. The Attic civil year be-
gan, theoretically, with the summer solstice, and
Gamelion, the seventh month, would naturally fall
after the winter solstice, in our January. Epicurus
was born in Samos, whither his father, Neocles, had
gone out from Athens to settle as a colonist. His
father bore the same name as the father of Themis-
tocles, a fact which led Menander to compose an
epigram comparing the achievements of their re-
spective sons. The son ofone Neocles had freed his
country from slavery; Epicurus, the son of the
other, from the worse bondage of superstitious folly.
Many philosophers and founders of religion have
aimed at emancipation, deliverance in a word, free-
dom. Seldom has the world seen one who went to
the same lengths in this direction as Epicurus. In
the extreme individualism of his ethical no less than
of his physical doctrine, and his refusal to base the
co-operation of his units on anything else but volun-
153
154 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
tary consent, he would seem to anticipate the prin-
ciples professed by modern anarchists, when these
latter pride themselves on their distinction from col-
lectivist socialists. The family of Neocles was never
well-to-do; his occupation was that of an elementary
schoolmaster. The gossip of a later day affirmed
that, when a boy, the son helped the father in his
duties and prepared ink for the pupils. From the
same perhaps untrustworthy source we learn that
his mother, Chaerestrata, performed certain dubious
rites, Half religious, half magical, intended to pro-
pitiate the deities and avert disease and misfortune
by charms and incantations. At these rites, cele-
brated at the cottages of her neighbours, it was the
boy's part to assist his mother by reading the incan-
tations. If this story is true, the employment must
have been singularly uncongenial to one who all his
life long hated falsehood, deceit, and superstition.
In 323 B. C. he proceeded to Athens to be enrolled
as a citizen and to undergo that training in military
duties which the constitution assigned to youths be-
tween the ages of eighteen and twenty. In this ser-
vice he made the acquaintance ofthe poet Menander,
who, born in the same year as himself, became his
friend and admirer. The spirit of the Epicurean
philosophy may be said to pervade the works of this
great dramatist of the New Comedy. About this
time Xenocrates was teaching in the Academy and
Theophrastus in the Lyceum; Aristotle had retired
to Chalcis, where in the next year he died.
But events marched apace. The death of Alex-
ander was followed by the unfortunate Lamian war,
and in 322 B. C. Perdiccas expelled the Athenian
colonists from their holdings in Samos. Epicurus
joined his father, now more than ever a broken
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 155
man, at Colophon, Of the next dozen years we
have little information, but we find him in 310 B. C.,
in his thirty-second year, at Mitylene, where he came
forward as a teacher of philosophy. Even as a
schoolboy he is said to have given proofs of an in-
quiring mind. When reading in Hesiod h'ow all
things had their origin in Chaos, he puzzled the
master by asking, "Whence came Chaos?" In
after days he boasted that he had been self-taught.
His writings and conversation were enlivened with
scoffs, gibes, and sneers at all other schools of so-
called wisdom, a precedent of liberty which in the
later Epicureans ran to unbounded licence. "The
followers of Plato he used to call
*
the flatterers of
Dionysius/ and Plato himself 'the man of gold/ and
Aristotle *a profligate who, after squandering his
patrimony, joined the army and sold drugs/ Prota-
goras he called
c
the porter' and
*
the copyistofDemo-
critus/ and said that
*
he taught grammar in villages/
Heraclitus he called 'the confusion-maker,' and
Democritus
'
the babbler/ " 1
It is quite certain,
however, that he studied the system of Democritus
with unusual care, and there is no ground for re-
jecting the story that he was for some time a pupil
of the Democritean Nausiphanes of Teos, whom he
sarcastically styled a "mollusc," to express contempt
for his want of backbone. At Mitylene, Epicurus
gained over Hermarchus, afterward his successor,
and at Lampsacus, on the Hellespont, he made the
most enduring friendships of his life. Here he be-
came acquainted with Idomeneus and Leonteus,
men of great influence in that town, who were his
patrons and lifelong correspondents and, with
1
Usener, Epicurea, p. 363, 1. 8. This invaluable work will be our
main source throughout the next two chapters.
156 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Metrodorus and Polyaenus, the ablest among his
disciples.
Though his teaching in Asia had been eminently
successful, he must have felt the attraction of the
home of philosophy. Athens was still the centre of
intellectual activity and social intercourse for the
ancient world, as Paris for the modern world. Here
was the most refined society, the greatest possibilities
for the aesthetic enjoyment of life. Accordingly,
about 306 B. C., Epicurus removed with his pupils
to Athens, which he never afterward quitted except
for short visits to Asia Minor. Of one such visit we
have a charming memorial, unearthed, like so much
besides of Epicurean literature, from beneath the
ashes of Herculaneum. It is a letter written by the
master to a little child, possibly the daughter of
Metrodorus, of whom more hereafter. We may
premise that Themista was the wife of Leonteus, of
Lampsacus, and Matron obviously a domestic in
charge of the child.
"We came to Lampsacus, Pythocles, Hermarchus,
Ctesippus, and myself, and we are quite well. We
found there Themista and our other friends, and they
are quite well. I hope you are well, too, and your
mamma, and that you obey her and papa and
Matron in everything, as you used to do. For you
know quite well, my pet, that I and all the others
love you very much, because you are obedient to
them in everything.
1
Even Swinburne
2
admits the genius of the child-
less George Eliot for understanding the ways of
children, and we may well believe that the bachelor
Epicurus, like the bachelor Herbert Spencer, was a
1
Epicurea, Fragment 176, p. 154, u.
3 In his Note on Charlotte Bronte.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 157
welcome guest in a family where there were children.
For more than thirty years, then, Epicurus resided
continuously in Athens. He founded a school by the
simple expedient of purchasing for eighty minae a
house and garden in the quarter known as Melite,
where his friends and disciples might have easy ac-
cess to him. Hence his followers were often known
as the Garden Philosophers. The little society was
united together by no other tie than that ofa common
affection to their teacher. Friends and admirers
quickly gathered round him, among them his three
brothers, who almost worshipped him. Nor were
women excluded, and even slaves were numbered
among his pupils. Though leading the life of a re-
cluse and holding aloof from political parties, he
enjoyed intercourse with the best minds of the day.
These years were not spent idly. Like Democritus,
Plato, and Aristotle before him, he was an inde-
fatigable and voluminous author. He wrote some
three hundred separate treatises, being surpassed ill
the wealth of his philosophic output by Chrysippus
alone among the ancients. At the same time he
kept up a vigorous correspondence with friends at
a distance who shared his aims. As we know from
Herculaneum, selections were published from the
letters of Epicurus, Metrodorus, Polyaenus, Her-
marchus, and their acquaintance. His great work,
On Nature, in thirty-seven books or rolls, occupied
him for several years. It had reached Book XV in
300-299 B. C., while Book XXVIII was finished in
296-5 B. C. In the production of a quantity of
literature so prodigious, something had to be sacri-
ficed. Ancient critics complain sadly that the
qualities of elegance and lucid arrangement so con-
spicuous in his three great predecessors above men-
158 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
tioned were totally wanting in him. Yet even
Cicero admits that, crude and commonplace as his
ideas were, the meaning was always plain; and prob-
ably this was all their author cared for. He was
too much in earnest to cultivate the graces of style,
and he looked down with contempt upon the accom-
plishments of an ordinary Athenian education, in
which high-flown rhetoric and hair-splitting logic
played a leading part.
1
The last years of Epicurus were clouded. His
favourite disciple, Metrodorus, died in 277 B. C, at
the age of fifty-three, and another able pupil, Poly-
aenus, predeceased him. The former left a son and
daughter, the latter a son, and Epicurus must have
deemed himself in a special sense responsible for
the education and future welfare of these orphans,
to whom he was probably guardian. By his will
his executors are charged
2
to provide for their main-
tenance in consultation with Hermarchus, and in
due course to provide a dowry for the girl on her
marriage. Epicurus had always been in delicate
health. In his boyhood, if we may trust Suidas,
he had to be lifted down from his chair, was blear-
eyed, and of so sensitive a skin that he could not
bear any clothing heavier than a tunic. He was
long subject to gout and dropsy, for many years he
was unable to walk, and finally renal calculus carried
him off in 270 B. C., in his seventy-second year.
These painful disorders he endured with the utmost
1 To judge by the scanty remains, the diction of Epicurus is not pure
Attic, but already betrays signs of that fusion of Greek dialects, generally
known by the name of Koine, which began about the time of Alexander's
conquests. In this respect Epicurus stands midway between Aristotle
and Polybius. See P. Linde, De Epicuri vocabulis ab optima Atthide
aliems.
3
Epicurea, p. 166, 13.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 159
fortitude. Scraps have come down to us from two
letters written by him in his last illness, the one to
his successor Hermarchus, the other to Idomeneus,
of Lampsacus. The latter
*
runs as follows:
"On this last, yet blessed, day ofmy life, I write
to you. Pains and tortures of body I have to the
full, but there is set over against these the joy ofmy
heart at the memory of our happy conversations
in the past. Do you, ifyou would be worthy ofyour
devotion to me and philosophy, take care of the
children of IVfetrodorus."
To the members of his little society he seems to
have been at all times extremely generous in contri-
butions from his own means, though he scouted
the'notion of a common purse, as savouring too much
of mistrust and suspicion between friends. It ap-
pears from his letters that the aged philosopher
had accepted annual contributions sent for his sup-
port from his wealthy friends in Lampsacus and
possibly from other quarters. Here we are re-
minded of the pecuniary help which Auguste Comte
received from his friends and admirers. In the
character of Epicurus the conspicuous traits are
sympathy, generosity, and sweet reasonableness.
No man was ever more vilely slandered or more
cruelly misunderstood, but the severest critics of
his teaching, Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch, in the most
honourable way dissociate themselves entirely from
the aspersions cast upon his personal character.
"Of his unequalled consideration toward all there is
ample testimony," says an ancient writer.
2 "I
appeal to his native country,which honouredhimwith
a statue, to the great number of his friends, who
could be counted by whole cities, to the followers
l
Epicurea, Fragment 138, p. 143*& ^^- P 364, *
160 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
attracted and held fast by the siren-charms of his
doctrines, to the long continuance and perpetuation
of his school in strong contrast to the checkered
fortunes of its rivals, to his gratitude to his parents,
his generosity to his brothers, his gentleness to his
slaves, as attested by his will and also by the fact
that slaves were among his pupils in fact, to his
universal kindness to all men." No less positive
is the evidence as to his frugality and abstemious
mode of life. "Send me some cheese of Cythnos,"
he writes to a friend, "that I may be able to fare
sumptuously when I like."
1
He was usually con-
tented with mere bread and water. The school
made experiments in frugal living. In a letter to
Polyaenus the master tells him that, while Metro-
dorus had only reduced his expenses to fourpence a
day, he himself had contrived to subsist on less.2
Whatever else he was, such a man was at all events
no epicure. At the same time such abstemiousness,
if practised universally, would not be without its
dangers. It has often happened that to raise the
standard of comfort and so to create wants is the
first step in social advance. What satisfied Epicurus
would fail to satisfy all men, or even the average
man. He must be credited with a certain lack of
imagination if he did not perceive this. Similarly
with another characteristic trait, his quietism. The
love of adventure, the thirst for honour, the cravings
of ambition found no response in his breast; but
neither would his own love of study, meditation, and
retirement ever appeal to any but a small section of
men, invalids, the elderly or the disillusioned. One
detail serves to illustrate the practical turn of his
1
Epicurea, Fragment 182, p. 156, 17.
2
/&., Fragment 158, p. 149, 20.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 161
mind. He foresaw that many would be curious to
learn the main outlines of his system without pos-
sessing the leisure, inclination, or ability to master
its details. Instead of repelling the advances ofsuch
honest folk, as Plato had done when he inscribed
over the portals of the Academy
"Let no one enter
here who is ignorant of geometry," Epicurus is care-
ful, even anxious, to cater for their peculiar needs.
He brought out an epitome of his doctrines, itself a
work of considerable length, known as the "larger"
epitome. As scholars now recognise, this was the
work which the poet Lucretius made the basis of
his poem in six books and over seven thousand
lines. But thiswas notenough. A shortersummary
was prepared and possibly the extant epistles to
Herodotus and Menceceus formed part of this.
Theymay, however, be distinct compilations. Lastly,
either the master himself or some authorities of the
school picked out a selection of golden sentences or
maxims,
1
articles of belief, which the members of
the society were exhorted to commit to memory,
to recite, and make the subject of meditation. The
Epicurean literature is full of allusions to them.
Not only are they preserved in the pages of Diogenes
Laertius, but they were actually discovered a few
years ago inscribed on the walls of the market-place
of(Enoanda, an obscure Pisidian town in the heartof
Asia Minor, where they might best catch the eye
alike of the rustic from the country and of the
cultured traveller.
Thus, though the three hundred treatises of the
master are either wholly lost or survive only in the
buried treasures of Herculaneum, yet, as a result of
these precautions, we are better informed upon most
1
Epicurea, p. 71, sqq.
162 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
points of Epicurean doctrine than upon the system
of any ancient philosopher with the sole exception
of Plato and Plotinus. But in fact the subsequent
history of the school is in itself a sufficient proof of
its founder's talent for organisation. Elsewhere we
find contending influences at work, perpetual change
of view and shifting of opinion, particularly when a
succession of teachers interpreted, enlarged, or vio-
lently combated the doctrines bequeathed to them.
The Academy was not content to preserve the tenets
of Plato unaltered, but passed by violent reactions
from dogmatism to scepticism, and probabilism, and
back to dogmatism again. In the Epicurean society
there was nothing comparable to this. From first to
last its members were united by a common reverence
for their founder, and hardly a trace is to be discov-
ered ofany serious dissent. It is their constant boast
that they frequently won adherents from the rival
schools, but that no Epicurean had gone over to
another school. To this rule there are only one or
two exceptions, the most conspicuous being Timoc-
rates, who seems, on personal grounds, to have had
a feud with his brother Metrodorus. Numenius
x
compared the school of Epicurus to a republic free
from party strife, having only one mind, one opinion,
in which an innovation would have been regarded as
an impiety. When Lucretius speaks of himself as
repeating oracles more holy, and far more certain
than those of the Pythian prophetess, he merely
voices the convictions of the whole brotherhood.
Their reverence for the writings of their master is the
counterpart of the attitude of evangelical Protestants
toward the Bible.
It is now time to inquire into the nature of that
1
Eusebius, Prcep. Evangel., XIV, 5.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 163
teaching which met with such an enthusiastic recep-
tion and was greeted almost like a revelation. VPhil-
osophy was defined by Epicurus as "a daily business
of speech and thought to secure a happy life."
1
Here is struck the note of intense earnestness char-
acteristic alike of Epicurus and his age. Philosophy
is a practical concern; it deals with the health of the
soul. It is a life and not merely a doctrine. It
holds out the promise of well-being and happiness.
This is the one thing needful. Literature, art, and
the other embellishments of life are not indispensable.
The wise man lives poems instead of making them.
"It need not trouble any one/* said Metrodorus,
2 "if
he had never read a line ofHomer and did not know
whether Hector was a Trojan or a Greek." Ac-
cordingly, as we have seen, Epicurus regarded with
indifference the ordinary routine education ofthe day
in grammar, rhetoric, dialectic, and music, and for
mere erudition he had a hearty contempt. The only
study absolutely necessary for a philosopher was the
study of nature, or whatwe now call natural science,
and this must be cultivated, not for its own sake, but
merely as the indispensable means to a happy life.
Unless and until we have learned the natural causes
of phenomena, we are at the mercy of superstition,
fears, and terrors.
We must defer to a subsequent chapter the con-
sideration of the steps by which Epicurus was led
to the conclusion that the external world is a vast
machine built up by the concourse of atoms in
motion without an architect or plan. Suppose,
however, this conclusion firmly established; whathas
our philosopher to tell us respecting human life and
action ? In what consists the happiness which is our
t Fragment 219, p. 169, 4.
a
Fragm. 24, ed. Korte.
164 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
being's end and aim ? This had, by the time of
Epicurus, become the chief question of philosophy,
and, strange as it may appear, the answer is no new
doctrine, but one which had often been proposed
and discussed in the ancient schools. He identifies
happiness, at least nominally, with pleasure, and he
means the pleasure of the agent. His is a system of
JEgoistic Hedonism. Verbally, then, he is in agree-
ment with Aristippus, the founder of the Cyrenaics,
with the Socrates of Plato's Protagoras, and with
Eudoxus, whose doctrine of pleasure is criticised by
Aristotle in the Nicomachean Ethics. The same
doctrine is discussed in more than one of Plato's
dialogues, sometimes apparentlywith approval, some-
times with disapproval. The historical Socrates
never, so far as we know, reached a final definition
of Good. He knew no good, he said, which was not
good for somebody or something. His teaching
would serve equally well as an introduction to Ego-
istic Hedonism, to Universal Hedonism, to Utili-
tarianism, or to Eudaemonism. The difficulty at
once occurs; if pleasure and good are identical, why
is it that some pleasures are approved as good and
others condemned as evil ? Why, on this hypothesis,
should life ever present conflicting alternatives in
which we are called upon to choose between doing
what is good and doing what is pleasant ? Every
hedonistic system must face this problem. Some
progress had been made by Plato in the Protagoras.
There his spokesman, Socrates, maintains that since
every one desires what is best for himself, and since
he further identifies good with pleasure, evil with
pain, he avoids pleasure when it is the source of still
greater pain, and only chooses pain when a greater
amount of pleasure results from it. In this Epicurus
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 165
heartily concurred. He never recedes from the posi-
tion that pleasure is always a good and pain always
an evil, but it does not follow that pleasure is always
to be chosen, pain to be shunned. For experience
shows that certain pleasures are attended by painful
consequences, certain pains by salutary results, and
it is necessary to measure or weigh these after-effects
one against the other before acting. "No one be-
holding evil chooses it, but, being enticed by it as by
a bait, and believing it to contain more good than
evil, he is ensnared/'
l
We now get a clearer notion of the end of action,
which turns out to be themaximumofpleasure to the
agent after subtraction ofwhatever pain is involved
in securing the pleasure or directly attends upon it.
At this point Epicurus parts company with Aristip-
pus, whose crude presentation of hedonistic doctrine
identified the end with the pleasure of the moment.
So soon as conditions and consequences are taken
into account, pleasure tends to become an ideal ele-
ment capable of being realised in a series of actions,
or in the whole of life, but not to be exhausted at any
given point of the series. More important, however,
for determining the exact significance of this concep-
tion is the incursion which Epicurus makesjmto_the_
psychology of desire. Desire is prompted by want;
unsatisfied want is painful. When we act in order
to gratify our desires, we are seeking to remove the
pain of want, but the cessation of the want brings a
cessation of mental trouble or unrest, and this must
carefully be distinguished from positive pleasure,
which is itself a mental disturbance. Experience
shows a succession of mental disturbances, painful
wants, the effort to remove them, and the pleasurable
1
Wotke, Wiener Sfadien, X, p. 192, sent 16.
166 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
excitement which attends their removal. But all
this shifting train has for its natural end and aim a
state which is neither want nor desire nor the pleas-
urable excitement of satisfying want. All of them
are fugitive states as contrasted with the resultant
peace and serenity in which they end. The former
'are compared to an agitated sea, whether swept by
storms or tempests or in gentle, equable motion, the
latter to the profound calm, waveless and noiseless,
of a sheltered haven. Beyond this neutral state of
freedom from bodily pain and mentai disturbance
it is impossible to advance. We may seek new
pleasures by gratifying new desires; we are only re-
turning to the old round of painful want, desire, and
pleasurable excitement ofremoving the want. There
is only one way to escape from this round, and that
is to be content to rest in the neutral state. After all,
this is the maximum of pleasure of which we are
capable; any deviation from it may vary our pleasure
but cannot increase it. "The amount of pleasure is
defined by the removal of all pain. Wherever there
is pleasure, so long as it is present, there is neither
bodily pain nor mental suffering, nor both."
*
The
consideration of these elementary facts should regu-
late preference and aversion. Prudence demands
the suppression of all unnecessary desires. Epicurus
does not carry renunciation so far as the Buddhists,
who hold that to live is to suffer, and explain the will
to live as that instinctive love of life which, partly
conscious, partly unconscious, is inherent in all liv-
ing beings. They look for their rest in Nirvana. Cer-
tain things, says Epicurus, we must desire, because
without them we cannot live, and life to Epicurus
is worth living; and yet the repose which consists in
1
Epicurea, p. 72, i, golden maxim No. 3.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 167
the cessation of desire is, after all, not altogether un-
like the Nirvana of the Buddhists.
In this negative conception of happiness as free-
dom from pain, whether of body or mind, Epicurus
must have been influenced by the ethical teaching
of Democritus, who also made happiness in its
essential nature consist in the cheerfulness and well-
being, the right disposition, harmony, and unalter-
able peace ofmind which enable a man to live a calm
and steadfast life. Democritus also exalted mental
above bodily pleasures and pains, and laid stress
upon ignorance, fear, folly, and superstition as causes
of those mental pains which tend most to disturb
life. With Epicurus the great obstacle to happiness
is neither pain nor poverty, nor the absence of the
ordinary good things of life; it is rather whatever
contributes to disturb our serenity and mental satis-
faction, whatever causes fear, anxiety in a word,
mental trouble. To be independent of circum-
stances is his ideal; that a man should find his true
good in himself. He is ready with practical sugges-
tions for realising this independence. Groundless fear
must be removed by the study ofnature, whichshows
that the fear of death, the fear of the gods, belief in
Providence and in divine retribution are chimeras;
desire must be regulated by prudence and the virtues
cultivated as the indispensable means to a pleasant
life. Fatalism is not true any more than the doctrine
that all things happen by chance. The future is not
in our power; our actions alone are in our power to
makethemwhatwe please. The letter to Menoeceus
*
sets forth the ethical doctrine of Epicurus in a con-
venient summary as follows:
"Let no one be slow to seek wisdom when he is
1
Epicurea, p. 59 sqq.
168 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
young nor weary in the search thereof when he is
grown old. For no age is too early or too late for
die health of the soul. And to say that the season
for philosophy has not yet come, or that it is passed
and gone, is like saying that the season for happiness
is not yet or that it is now no more. Therefore, both
old and young ought to seek wisdom, that so a man
as age comes over him may be young in good things,
because of the grace ofwhat has been, and while he
is young may likewise be old, because he has no fear
of the things which are to come. So we must exer-
cise ourselves in the things which bring happiness,
since, if that be present, we have everything and, if
that be absent, all our actions are directed toward
attaining it.
"Those things which without ceasing I have de-
clared unto thee, those do and exercise thyselftherein,
J^gl^ing them to be the elements of right life. First,
believe that God is a being blessed and immortal,
according to the- notion of a God commonly Held
amongst men; and so believing, thou shalt not af-
firm of him aught that is contrary to immortality or
that agrees not with blessedness, but shalt believe
about him whatsoever may uphold both his blessed-
ness and his immortality. For verily there are
gods, and the knowledge of them is manifest; but
they are not such as the multitude believe, seeing
that men do not steadfastly maintain the notions
*they form respecting them. Not the man who
denies the gods worshipped by the multitude, but he
who affirms of the gods what the multitude believes
about them, is truly impiousj For the utterances of
the multitude about the goas are not true precon-
ceptions but false assumptions, according to which
the greatest evils happen to the wicked and the
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 169
greatest blessings happen to the good from the hand
of the gods, seeing that they are always favourable
to their own good qualities and take pleasure in
men like unto themselves, but reject as alien what-
ever is not oftheir kind.
"Accustom thyself to believe that death is nothing
to us, for good and evil imply sentience and death
is the privation of all sentience; therefore, a right
understanding that death is nothing to us makes
enjoyable the mortality of life, not by adding to life
an illimitable time, but by taking away the yearning
after immortality. For life has no terrors for him
who has thoroughly apprehended that there are no
terrors for him in ceasing to live. Foolish, therefore,
is the man who says that he fears death, not because
it will pain when it comes, but because it pains in
the prospect* Whatsoever causes no annoyance
when it is present causes only a groundless pain in
the expectation. Death, therefore, the most awful
of evils, is nothing to us, seeing that when we are,
death is not come, and when death is come, we are
not. It is nothing, then, either to the living or the
dead, for with the living it is not and the dead exist
no longer. But in the world, at one time men shun
death as the greatest of all evils and at another time
choose it as a respite from the evils in life. The wise
man does not deprecate life nor does he fear the ces-
sation of life. The thought of life is no offence ta
him nor is the cessation of life regarded as an evil.
And even as men choose of good, not merely and
simply the larger portion, but the more pleasant,
so the wise seek to enjoy the time which is most
pleasant and not merely that which is longest.
And he who admonishes the young to live well and
the old to make a good end, speaks foolishly, not
170 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
merely because ofthe desirableness of life, but because
the same exercise at once teaches to live well and to
die well. Much worse is he who says that it were
good not to be born, but when once one is born to
pass with all speed through the gates of Hades. Ifhe,
in truth, believes this, why does he not depart from
life ? It were easy for him to do so if once he is
firmly convinced. If he speaks only in mockery
his words are foolishness, for those who hear believe
him not.
"We must remember that the future is neither
wholly ours nor wholly not ours, so that neither
must we count upon it as quite certain to come nor
despair of it as quite certain not to come.
"We must also reflect that of desires some are
natural, some are groundless; and that of the
natural, some are necessary as well as natural and
some are natural only. And of the necessary desires,
some are necessary if we are to be happy, some if
the body is to be rid of uneasiness, some if we are
even to live. He who has a clear and certain under-
standing of these things will direct every preference
and aversion toward securing health of body and
tranquillity of mind, seeing that this is the sum and
end of a blessed life. For the end of all our actions
is to be free from pain and fear, and when once we
have attained this all the tempest of the soul is laid,
seeing that the living creature has no need to go in
search of something that is lacking nor to look for
anything else by which the good of the soul and of
the body will be fulfilled. When we are pained
because of the absence of pleasure, then, and then
only, do we feel the need of pleasure; but when we
feel no pain, then we no longer stand in need of
pleasure. Wherefore we call pleasure the alpha and
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 171
omega of a blessed life. Pleasure is our firstTand
kindred good. It is the starting-point ofevery choice
and ofevery aversion, and to it we come back, inas-
much aswe make feeling the rule by which to judge
ofevery good thing.
"And since pleasure is our first and native good,
for that reason we do not choose every pleasure
whatsoever, but oftrimes pass over many pleasures
when a greater annoyance ensues from them.! And
ofttimes we consider pains superior to pleasureswhen
submission to the pains for a long time brings us as
its consequence a greater pleasure. While, tKere^l
fore, all pleasure because it is naturally akin to us is^
good, not all pleasure is choiceworthy, just as all pain
is an evil but all pain is not to be shunned. It is,
however, by measuring one against another, and by
looking at the conveniences and inconveniences, that
all these matters must be judged. Sometimes we
treat the good as an evil and the evil, on the con-
trary, as a good. Again, we regard independence of
outward things as a great good, not so as in all
cases to use little, but so as to be contented with
little ifwe have not much, being honestly persuaded
that they have the sweetest enjoyment of luxurywho
stand least in need of it, and that whatever is natural
is easily procured and only the vain and worthless
hard to win. Plain fare is not more distasteful than
a costly diet, when once the pain of want has been
removed, while bread and water confer the highest
possible pleasure when they are brought to hungry
lipslTo habituate one's self, therefore, to simple
atftr inexpensive diet supplies all that is needful
for health, and enables a man to meet the neces-
sary requirements of life without shrinking, .and it
places us in a better condition when we approach
172 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
at intervals a costly fare and renders us fearless of
fortune.
/ "When we say, then, that pleasure is the end and
aim, we do not mean the pleasures of the prodigal
or the pleasures of sensuality, as we are understood
tq^do by some, through ignorance, prejudice, or wilful
misinterpretation. R^plpagnn* w^ p^ean the ph-
^enrgurrf p^in in the bnrty and trouble in the soul .
It is not an unbroken succession of drinking feasts
and of revelry, not sexual love, not the enjoyment of
the fish and other delicacies of a luxurious table
which produce a pleasant life; it is sober reasoning,
searching out the grounds of every choice and
avoidance, and banishing those beliefs through
which greatest tumults take possession of the soul.
Of all this the beginning and the greatest good is
prudence. Wherefore, prudence is a more precious
thing even than philosophy; from it spring all the
other virtues, for it teaches that we cannot lead a
life of pleasure which is not also a life of prudence,
honour, and justice^ GosJtaad a life of prudence,
honour, and justice which is not also a lifeof pleasure.
For the virtues have grown into one with a pleasant
life, and a pleasant life is inseparable from them.
"Who, then, is superior, in thy judgment, to such a
man ? He holds a holy belief concerning the gods,
and is altogether free from the fear of death. He
has diligently considered the end fixed by nature, and
understands how easily the limit of good things can
be procured and attained; that as for evils either
their duration or their poignancy is but slight.
Destiny,-which some introduce as sovereign over all
things, he laughs to scorn, affirming that certain
things happen of necessity, others by chance, others
through our own agency. For he sees that necessity
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 173
destroys responsibility and that chance or fortune
is inconstant; whereas our own actions are free,
and it is to them that praise and blame naturally
attach. It were better, indeed, to accept the legends
of the gods than to bow beneath that yoke of des-
tiny which the natural philosophers have imposed.
The one holds out some faint hope that we may
escape by honouring the gods, while the necessity of
the philosophers is deaf to all supplications. Nor
does such an one make chance a god, as the world
in general does (for in the acts of God nothing is
irregular), nor yet regard it as a vacillating cause,
for he believes that chance dispenses to men no good
or evil which can make life blessed though it furn-
ishes means and occasions for great good and great
evil. He believes that the misfortune of the wise is
better than the prosperity of the fool. It is better,
in short, that what is well judged in action should not
owe its successful issue to the aid ofchance.
"Exercise thyself in these and kindred precepts
day and night, both by thyself and with him who is
like unto thee; then never, either in waking or in
dream, wilt thou be disturbed but wilt live as a god
amongst men. For by living in the midst ofimmor-
tal blessings man loses all semblance of mortality."
In this-document scientific ethics, as the term is
now understood, is overlaid with a variety of other
-topics. The practical exordium, the dogmatic in-
culcation of moral precepts, the almost apostolic
fervour and seriousness of tone find their nearest
counterpart in the writings of religious teachers.
We are reminded by turns of the Proverbs of Sol-
omon and of the Epistles of St. Paul The re-
jection of the popular religion and the denial of
divine retribution are coupled with an emphatic
174 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
affirmation of the existence of blessed and immortal
gods. The instinctive fear of death is declared to
be groundless; and here the writer enlarges upon a
theme, first started by the sophist Prodicus, that
death is nothing to us. Incidentally, the value of
life is vindicated and the folly of pessimism exposed.
The limitation of desire is seen to involve habitua-
tion to an almost ascetic bodily discipline, in order
that the wise man may become self-sufficing, that
isj independent of external things. Lastly, the free-
dom of human action is stoutly maintained in op-
position to the doctrine of natural necessity first
promulgated by the earlier Atomists Leucippus and
Democritus, but at the time of Epicurus developed
with the utmost rigour and consistency by the Stoics.
On the main question there is no uncertainty.
The pleasure of the agent is the foundation upon
which Epicurus, like many after him, sought to
construct a theory of morality which would explain
scientifically the judgments of praise and blame
passed by the ordinary man. All systems allow that
there are self-regarding virtues and self-regarding
duties, and when he has given his peculair interpre-
tation of -
pleasure, Epicurus has no great difficulty
with these. But the case is different when we come
to the social virtues and the duties which a man
owes to his neighbour. In a system which makes
self-love the centre of all virtues, and in which all
duties must be self-regarding, ifwe accept, as he did,
as a psychological truth that by instinct and nature
all are led to pursue their own pleasure and avoid
theirown pain,how can any conduct savouringof dis-
interestedness find rational justification ? This was
the great problem of the English and French moral-
ists in that age of enlightenment, the eighteenth cen-
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 175
tury. As then, so two thousand years before in
Greece, extreme individualism was the order of
the day. The primary fact is individual man as he
is given by nature, and all that lies outside this,
all that he has been made by institutions like the
family and the state, all the relations that go be-
yond the individual are subsequent, secondary, de-
rivative, requiring to be explained from him and to
justify their validity to the reason. Take a concrete
instance. Whence came the rules of justice ? What
makes actions just and how is my obedience to such
rules, enjoined by Epicurus, an indispensable means
to my own happiness ? In short, how does disinter-
ested conduct arise under a selfish system ? The
answer given to this question was often repeated
later. It reappears in Hobbes and Rousseau. Be-
fore dealing with it, it is necessary to consider briefly
the Epicurean conception of the growth of human
civilisation from the earliest times.
Looking back at the past history of our planet,
Epicurus derives all organisms, first plants, then ani-
mals, from mother earth. The species with which we
are familiar are those which, being adapted to their
environment, prospered in the struggle for existence.
They were preceded by many uncouth creatures and
ill-contrived monsters, many races of living things,
which have since died out from lack of food or some
similar cause. Apartfrom the undeniable suggestion
ofone feature in the doctrine ofevolution, the account
of the origin of life is in its details wholly unscientific
and even repulsive. But with surer insight primitive
man is described as hardier than now: destitute of
clothing and habitation, he lived a roving life like the
beasts withwhom he waged ceaseless warfare, haunt-
ing the woods and caves, insensible to hardship and
176 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
privation. The first step in advance was the dis-
covery of fire, due to accident. Afterward man
learned to build huts and clothe himself with skins.
Then the progress of culture is traced with the begin-
nings ofdomestic life through the discovery and trans-
mission of useful arts. As comforts multiplied, the
robust strength of the state of nature was gradually
impaired by new disabilities, particularly suscepti-
bility to disease. Language was not the outcome of
convention, but took its rise from the cries whitrh, like
the noises of animals, are the instinctive expression
of the feelings and emotions. Experience is the
mother of invention and of all the arts. They are
all due to the intelligent improvement of what was
offered or suggested to man by natural occasions.
None of the blessings of civilisation are due to the
adventitious aid of divine agency. Man raised him-
selffrom a state of primitive rudeness and barbarism
and gradually widen'ed the gulfwhich separated him
from other animals. From the stage when men and
women lived on the wild fruits ofthe wood and drank
the running stream, when their greatest fear was of
the claws and fangs of savage beasts, to the stage
when they formed civic communities and obeyed laws
and submitted to the ameliorating influences ofwed-
lock and friendship, all has been the work of man,
utilising his natural endowments and natural circum-
stances. Religion has been rather a hinderance than
a help in the course of civilisation. Next to the use
of money, the baleful dread of supernatural powers
has been the most fruitful source of evil.
In this historical survey, where shall we find the
origin of law and justice ? Epicurus was fully con-
vinced that in the present state of society "the just
man enjoys the greatest peace of mind, the unjust is
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 177
full of the utmost disquietude";
*
and yet injustice is
not in itself an evil, and in the state of nature man
is predatory. The explanation tendered by Epicurus,
as by Hobbes and Hume, is that ofa compact which,
once made, is ever afterward strictly observed. Yet
it is not easy to discover why men should carry out a
compactmade in their natural, that is, predatory state.
Why should the wise man observe it ifhe find secret
injustice possible and convenient ? Epicurus frankly
admits that the only conceivable motive which can
deterhim is self-interest, the desire to avoid the pain-
ful anxieties that the perpetual dread of discovery
would entail. Even if the compact could be evaded,
prudential considerations forbid it, since the risk of
detection is enormous and the mere possibility of dis-
covery is an ever-present evil sufficient to poison all
the goods of life. That such motives do not weigh
with criminals is irrelevant; we are dealing now with
the wise and prudent man. "Natural justice is a
contract of expediency, to prevent one man from
harming or being harmed by another."
2
"Those
animals which were incapable of making compacts
with one another, to the end that they might neither
inflict nor suffer harm, are without either justice or
injustice. Similarly those tribes which either could
not or would not form mutual covenants to the same
end are in the like case." 3
Justice, then, is artificial,
not natural. The view could not be more clearly
expressed. This is just the position taken up by
modern international law and just the attitude adopt-
ed by Christian nations; in historical times to those
outside the pale of civilisation, who are assumed
1
Epicurea, p. 75, 3, golden maxim No. XVII.
2
Ib., p. 78, 8, golden maxim No. XXXI.
3
/&., p. 78, 10, golden maxim No. XXXII.
178 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
to have no rights. So, too, Hume holds that we
should not, properly speaking, lie under any re-
straint of justice with regard to rational beings who
were so much weaker than ourselves that we had no
reason to fear their resentment. "There never was
an absolute justice," says one of the golden sen-
tences,
"but only a convention made in mutual inter-
course, in whatever region, from time to time, pro-
viding against the infliction or suffering of harm/*
1
"Injustice is not in itself an evil, but only in its con-
sequence, viz.., the terror which is excited by appre-
hension that those appointed to punish such offences
will discover the injustice/'
2
"It is impossible for
the man who secretly violates any article of the social
compact to feel confident that he will remain undis-
covered, even ifhe has already escaped ten thousand
times; for until his death he is never sure he will not
be detected."
3
It was easy for the Stoics to present
this in an unfavourable light as does Epictetus when
he says: "Not even does Epicurus himself declare
stealing to be bad, but he admits that detection is,
and because it is impossible to have security against
detection, for this reason he says, Do not steal."
4
"Taken generally," to quote another Epicurean say-
ing, "justice is the same for all, but in its applica-
tion to particular
-
cases of territory or the like, it
varies under different circumstances."
5
In other
words, justice is the foundation of all positive law,
but the positive law ofone state will differ from that of
another. "Whatever in conventional law is attested
to be expedient in the needs arising out of mutual
1
Epicurea, p. 78, 15, golden maxim No. XXXIII.
2
/&., p. 79, i, golden maxim No. XXXIV.
3
/&., p. 79, 4, golden maxim No. XXXV.
4
/&., p. 322, 6.
8
/&., p. 79, 8, golden maxim No. XXXVI.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 179
intercourse is by its nature just, whether the same for
all or not, and in case any law is made and does not
prove suitable to the expediency of mutual inter-
course, then this is no longer just. And should the
expediency which is expressed by the law vary and
only for a time correspond with the notion of justice,
nevertheless, for the time being, it was just, so long
as we do not trouble ourselves about empty terms
but look broadly at facts."
*
Thus a law judged to
be inexpedient is no longer binding. The old sophis-
tical quibble that no positive law can be unjust Epi-
curus, from his stand-point, can easily expose, and he
is equally well able to meet the conservative dislike
and dread of legislative innovation as something es-
sentially immoral. "Where without any change in
circumstances the conventional laws when judged by
their consequences were seen not to correspond with
the notion of justice, such laws were not really just;
but wherever the laws have ceased to be expedient in
consequenceofa change in circumstances, in that case
the laws were for the time being just, when they were
expedient for the mutual intercourse of the citizens,
and ceased subsequently to be just when they ceased
to be expedient."
2 "He who best insured safety
from external foes made into one nation all the folk
capable of uniting together, and those incapable of
such union he assuredly did not treat as aliens; if
therewere anywhom he could noteven on such terms
incorporate, heexcluded them from intercoursewhen-
ever this suited with hisown interests." 3
Thus civilisation is an advance upon the condition
of primitive man; nor does Epicurus ever contem-
1
Epzcurea, p. 79, 12, golden ma^im No. XXXVII.
a
ft., p. 80, 6, golden maxim No. XXXVUI.
*J&^ jx So, 15, golden maxim No. XXXIX
180 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
plate the possibility of undoing what has been done.
Applying the standard ofhuman good in his own con-
ception of it as tranquil enjoyment, he pronounces
government to be a benefit to the wise so far as it
protects them from harm. But it does not therefore
follow that they should themselves take part in po-
litical administration; they are only advised to do so
in circumstances where it is necessary and so far as
it is necessary for theirown safety. Experience shows
that as a rule the private citizen lives more calmly and
safely than the public man. The burdens of office
are a hinderance rather than an aid to the end of life.
"The Epicureans/' says Plutarch, "shun politics as
the ruin and confusion of true happiness."
*
An un-
obtrusive life is the ideal. To strive at power without
attaining one's own personal security is an act of
folly certain to entail lasting discomfort. Moreover,
as Philodemus remarks,
" If any one were to inquire
which influence is of all others the most hostile to
friendship and the most productive of enmity, he
would find it to be politics, because of the envy of
one's rivals and the ambition natural in those so en-
gaged and the discord recurring when opposite no-
tions are proposed."
2
Restless spirits, however,who
cannot find satisfaction in retirement are permitted
to face the risks of public activity. To all forms of
government the Epicureans were theoretically indif-
ferent, but the impossibility of pleasing the multitude
and the necessity of strong control inclined them to
favour the monarchical principle. Under all circum-
stances they recommended unconditional obedience.
The traditions of the old republican life of petty
Greek states demanded from the citizen far more than
this active co-operation, personal sacrifice, enthusi-
l
Epicurea, p. 327, 20. *
Ib., p. 328, 4-
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 181
asm for the common cause. Judged by this stand-
ard, the Epicurean would seem to take an unfair
advantage of the state. He got all the protection it
afforded and shirked as much as he could of its
burdens. But, in reality, what he was prepared to
contribute would fully satisfy the demands of the
modern territorial state. To obey the laws, to pay
taxes, to assist by an occasional vote in the formation
of public opinion constitutes nowadays the whole of
civic duty for the vast majority of citizens. Under
existing conditions how can it be otherwise ? For,
in order to integrate, as it were, these multitudinous
infinitesimals organisation is required; but division
of responsibility and specialisation of function cir-
cumscribe personal effort. Again, when the popular
cry has been adequately voiced by press or platform
and has taken effect through proportional represen-
tation or other constitutional means, the greatness
of the results secured and the very perfection of the
machinery for securing them leave less and less scope
to private initiative.
The consistent application of individualist prin-
ciples might enjoin a severance, so far as is possible,
from the ties of the family no less than of the state,
and the picture of the wise man represents him as
shirking these responsibilities also. But such a
counsel of perfection has regard to special circum-
stances, and in all fairness the actual conduct of the
man should be allowed to correct the supposed ten-
dency of his system. Now, by his kindness to his
brothers, his gratitude to his parents, and his tender
solicitude for his wards, Epicurus is proved to have
cherished warm family affection himself. Nor is it
reasonable to presume that the philosopher who
deprecated suicide, except in extreme cases, and set
182 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the example by so cheerfully enduring severe physical
pain, can ever seriously have intended race suicide.
Political association, even if originally based upon a
contract, has its present sanction in pains and penal-
ties. It is at best a compromise, a pis alter of only
relative and subsidiary value. Men submit to the
compulsion and constraint which it entails for fear
of finding something worse. The true form of asso-
ciation is that in which man surrenders nothing of
his original freedom, and this Epicurus believed to
be realised in friendship, upon which he set the
highest value. The only duties that Epicurus recog-
nises are those voluntarily accepted on reasonable
grounds, not from natural instinct or compulsion of
circumstances. "No one," says Epicurus, "loves
"another except for his own interest/'
l
"Human
nature alone does not give natural affection for
nothing, nor can it love without advantage to it-
self."
2
"Of all things which wisdom provides for
the happiness of a lifetime, by far the greatest is the
acquisition of friendship/I*
3
The terms in which it
is extolled recall the eulogies lavished upon the
Christian grace of charity or love. It was the signal
characteristic of the little society in the founder's
lifetime, and it continued a prominent trait of the
sect to the latest times. Upon its own principles no
ethical system which starts with self-love can recog-
nise disinterested conduct. Nor did Epicurus an-
ticipate Hume's discovery and call in sympathy as a
necessary supplement to self-interest. He is, there-
fore, obliged to maintain that friendship, like justice,
is based solely upon mutual utility. The services
rendered have the same selfish motive which prompts
a, p. 324, 16; c). Wotke, Wiener Studien, X, p. 193, sent. 23.
*Epicurea, p. 320, 12. 8
/Z>., p. 77, u.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 183
the farmer to commit the seed to the soil in expecta-
tion of a future harvest. So alone the theory is con-
sistent; friendship, like the cynic's gratitude, must
needs be a lively sense offavours yet to come. There
is, of course, a difficulty at the beginning. Some one
must make the start. "Neither those who are over-
ready nor those who are too slow to enter into
friendships are to be approved; one must even run.
some risk in order to make friends/'
l
"To" do
good," says Epicurus, "is not only more noble, but
also more pleasant" (mark the predicate) "than to
receive good."
2 Benevolence would cease to be a
virtue if it ceased to be self-regarding. Yet it was
upon this unsound basis that devoted friendships
were based. When we are told that the wise man
will, upon occasion, even die for his friend, the sug-
gestion of disinterested action, however inconsistent,
can hardly be dismissed. "The wise man suffers
no more pain when on the rack himself than when
his friend is upon it; but if any man suspects his
friend, his whole life will by his distrust be con-
founded and turned upside down."
3
And there are
other utterances to the same effect. "What we re-
quire is not so much to have our needs supplied by
our friends as to be assured that our needs will be
supplied by them."
4
"The wise man, when brought
into distress in company with others, shows himself
a comrade ready to give rather than to receive; so
great a treasure of self-reliance has he found."
5
In the foregoing sketch the main questions of
ethics have come before us and the answers of
1
Wotke, Wiener Studi&n, X, p. 193, sent. 28.
3
Epicurea, p. 325, 10.
3
Wotke, L c., p. 196, sentt. 56, 57.
*
7&., L c.> X* p. 193, sent. 34.
5
/&., /. ., X, p. 194, sent. 44.
184 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Epicurus have been indicated in outline. Like his
rivals the Stoics, he made his appeal to the world
primarily as a moral teacher, an inquirer whose aim
was to deal comprehensively and systematically with
moral problems. To this inquiry the study of na-
ture, which will occupy us in the next chapter, was
subordinate. He had convinced himself that the
main fruit of philosophy consisted in happiness of
life and that philosophy was successful just in so
far as this was promoted. This aspect of the system
will become more apparent if we now consider the
remarkable collection of its more important tenets,
which has come down to us in the form ofsome forty
isolated quotations from his voluminous writings.
Whether Epicurus himself made this collection or
whether it was formed by his disciples cannot now
be precisely determined. At a very early time it
obtained a wide circulation among his followers,
who were ever afterward recommended to commit
to memory this collection of golden maxims as well
as other shorter or longer epitomes of the master's
teaching. The importance attached to these authori-
tative pronouncements must be our excuse for re-
producing the greater part of them, although it will
be obvious that except the first, which lays the
foundation for his views upon religion, and the
twenty-second, twenty-third, and twenty-fourth,
which deal with his theory of knowledge, they are of
an ethical character and must therefore simply
recapitulate the ethical theory which we have al-
ready attempted to expound. The following, then,
are the main tenets or golden maxims of Epicurus
:
1
I. A blessed and eternal being has no trouble
itself and brings no trouble upon any other being;
1 The golden maxims are given in Usener, Epicurea, pp. 71 sqq.
EPICURUS AND JiEDONISM 185
hence it is exempt from movements of anger and
favour, for every such movement implies weakness.
H. Death is nothing to us; for the body, when
it has been resolved into its elements, has no feeling,
and that which has no feeling is nothing to us.
III. The magnitude of pleasures is limited by
the removal of all pain. Wherever there is pleasure,
so long as it is present, there is no pain either ofbody
or of mind or both,
IV. Continuous pain does not last long in the
flesh, and pain, if extreme, is present a very short
time, and even that degree of pain which barely
outweighs pleasure in the flesh does not occur for
many days together, -flteesses of long duration
even permitof an excess of pleasure over pain in the
flesh.
V. It is impossible to live a pleasant life without
living wisely and well and justly, and it is impossible
to live wisely and well and justly without living
pleasantly. Whenever any one of these is lacking,
when, for instance, the man does not live wisely,
though he lives well and justly, it is impossible fof
him to live a pleasant life.
VI. As far as concerns protection from other
men, anymeans ofprocuring thiswas a natural good,
VIL Some men sought to become famous and
renowned, thinking that thus they would make
themselves secure against their fellow-men. If,
then, the life of such persons really was secure, they
attained natural good; if, however, it was insecure,
they have not attained the end which by nature's
^ojropromprings they originally sought.
THl. No pleasure is in itself evil, but the things
which produce certain pleasures entail annoyances
many times greater than the pleasures themselves.
186 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
If all pleasure had been capable of accumu-
lation, if this had gone on not only in time, but all
over the frame or, at any rate, the principal parts of
man's nature, there would not have been any differ-
ence between one pleasure and another as, in fact,
tljere now is.
^*X* If the objects which are productive of pleas-
ures to profligate persons really freed them from
fears of the mind the fears, I mean, inspired by
celestial and atmospheric phenomena, the fear of
death, the fear of pain if, further, they taught them
to limit their desires,we should not have any reason
to censure such persons, for they would then be filled
with pleasure to overflowing on all sides and would
be exempt from all pain, whether of body or mind,
that is, from all evil.
(SSO. If we had never been molested by alarms
atScelestial and atmospheric phenomena, nor by
the misgiving that death somehow affects us, nor
by neglect of the proper limits of pains and desires,
should have had no need to study natural
It would be impossible to banish fear on
natters of the highest importance if a man did not
inow the nature of the whole universe but lived in
dread of what the legends tell us. Hence, without
the study of nature there was no enjoyment of un-
mixed pleasures.
J^HJ,- There would be no advantage in providing
security against our fellow-men so long as we were
alarmed by occurrences over our heads or beneath
the earth, or in general by whatever happens in the
infinite void.
XN. When tolerable security against our fellow-
men is attained, then on a basis of power arises most
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 187
genuine bliss, to wit, the security of a private life
withdrawn from the multitude.
X)^. Nature's wealth has its bounds and is easy
to procure, but the wealth of vain fancies recedes to
an infinite distance.
XVL Fortune but slightly crosses the wise man's
path; his greatest and highest interests are directed
by reason throughout the course of life.
XVII. The just man enjoys the greatest peace of
mind, the unjust is full of the utmost disquietude.
Xv^tJL Pleasure in the flesh admits no increase
When once the pain of want has been removed;
after that it only admits of variation. ^Rre limit of
pleasure in the mind is obtained by calculating the
pleasures themselves and the contrary pains, which
cause the mind the greatest alarms.
XQL Infinite time and finite time hold an equal
amount of pleasure, ifwe measure the limits of that
pleasure by reason. *
XX. The flesh assumes the limits of pleasure to
be infinite, and only infinite timewould satisfy it. But
the mind, grasping In thought what the end and
limit of the flesh is, and banishing the terrors of
futurity, procures a complete and perfect life and
has no longer any need of infinite time. Neverthe-
less, it does not shun pleasure, and even in the hour
of death, when ushered out of existence by circum-
stances, the mind does not fail to enjoy the best
i^$(. He who understands the limits of life
knows how easy it is to procure enough to remove
the pain ofwant and make the whole of life complete
and perfect. Hence he has no longer any need of
things which are not to be won save by conflict and
struggle.
188 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
XXII. We must take into account as the end all
that really exists and all clear evidence of sense to
whichwe refer our opinions; for otherwise everything
will be full of uncertainty and confusion.
XXIII. If you- fight against all your sensations
you will have no standard to which to refer, and thus
no means ofjudging even those sensations which you
pronounce false.
XXIV. If you reject absolutely any single sen-
sation without stopping to discriminate between that
which is matter of opinion and awaits further con-
firmation and that which is already present, whether
in sensation or in feeling or in any mental appre-
hension, you will throw into confusion even the rest
of your sensations by your groundless belief, so as
to reject the truth altogether. If you hastily affirm
as true all that awaits confirmation in ideas based
on opinion, as well as that which does not, you will
not escape error, as you will be taking sides in every
question involving truth and error.
XXV. If you do not on every separate occasion
refer each ofyour actions to the chief end of nature,
but ifinstead ofthis in the act of choice or avoidance
you swerve aside to some other end, your acts will
notjbgconsistent with your theories.
-
Q^^) Some desires lead to no pain when they
remain^ngratified. All such desires are unnecessary,
and the longing is easily got rid of when the thing
desired is difficult to procure or when the desires
seem likely to produce harm.
XXVII: Of all the means which are procured
bywisdom to insure happiness throughout the whole
of life, by far the most important is the acquisition
of friends.
XXVIII. The same conviction, which inspires
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 189
confidence that nothing we have to fear is eternal or
even of long duration, also enables us to see that even
in our limited life nothing enhances our security so
much as friendship.
XXIX. Of our desires, some are natural and
necessary; others are natural, but not necessary;
others, again, are neither natural nor necessary, but
are due to groundless opinion.
XXX. Some natural desires, again, entail no
pain when not gratified, though the objects are
vehemently pursued. These desires also are due to
groundless opinion, and when they are not got rid
of, it is not because of their own nature, but because
of the man's groundless opinion.
XL.
1
Thosewho could best insure the confidence
that they would be safe from their neighbours, being
thus in possession of the surest guarantee, passed
the most agreeable life in each other's society, and
their enjoyment ofthe fullest intimacy was suchthat,
if one ofdiem died before his time, the survivors did
not lament his death as if it called for pity.
To the foregoing we may add a few ethical frag-
ments of Diogenes of (Enoanda, which may or may
not be actual words of Epicurus:
2
"Nothing is so productive of cheerfulness as to
abstain from meddling and not to engage in difficult
undertakings, nor force yourself to do something
beyond your power. For ail this involves your
nature in tumults/
5 3
"The main part of happiness is the disposition
which is underourown control. Service in the field is
1 Numbers XXXI to XXXIX, which deal with justice, have already
been quoted in this chapter, pp. 177 sqq.
2 See Diogenis. (Enoandensis Fragmenta (loh. William), p. 3d.
3
Diogeoes of (Enoanda, Fragment LVI (William).
190 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
hard work, and others hold command. Public speak-
ing abounds in heart-throbs and in anxiety whether
you can carry conviction. Why, then, pursue an ob-
ject like this, which is at the disposal ofothers ?"
*
"Not nature, which is the same in all, makes men
noble or ignoble, but their actions and dispositions."
2
"Wealth beyond the requirements of nature is no
more benefit to men than water to a vessel which is
full. Both alike must be supposed to overflow. We
can look upon another's possessions without per-
turbation and can enjoy purer pleasure than they,
for we are free from their arduous struggle/'
3
"Nature forces us to utter an exclamation when
groaning under pain, but to indulge in lamentations
because we cannot rejoice in the ranks of the healthy
and prosperous is the result of groundless opinion."
4
It is one thing to trace the outlines of an ethical
system; it is quite another to comprehend its inner
spirit. When a philosopher's works have not come
down to us, it is some compensation if some of his
memorable and characteristic utterances have been
preserved, because they impressed themselves upon
contemporaries and on posterity. Epicurus was a
fearless and original thinker, contending at great
odds against the sympathies and prejudices of the
world. It is worth while to collect a few of his
striking sayings in order, if possible, to get some idea
of the workings of his mind.
"You must become a slave to philosophy if you
would gain true freedom."
5
"The most precious fruit of independence and
plain living is freedom." e
1
Ib.t Fragment LVII. 2
H>., Fragment LIX. 3
/&., Fragment LX.
4
Ib.j Fragment LXI. s
Epicurea, p. 160, 25.
6
Wotke, Wiener Studim* X, p. 197, sent 77.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 191
"Let us completely drive out evil habits as if they
were wicked men who have for long wrought us
great harm."
l
"Among the other ills which attend folly is this:
it is always beginning to live." 2
"We are born once; twice we cannot be born, and
for everlasting we must be non-existent. But thou,
who art not master of the morrow, puttest off the
right time. Procrastination is the ruin of life for all;
and, therefore, each of us is hurried and unprepared
at death/
5 3
"A foolish life is uncomfortable and restless; it
is wholly engrossed with the future/'
4
"It is absurd to run to death from weariness of
life when your style of life has forced you to run to
death. What so absurd as to court death when you
have made life restless through fear of death ?"
5
"Learn betimes to die or, if thou like it better, to
pass over to the gods."
6
"He who is least in need of the morrow will meet
the morrow most pleasantly."
7
"Vain is the discourse of that philosopher by
which no human suffering is healed."
8
"We must both study philosophy and manage our
household affairs at the same time, and use the rest
of our resources, and never cease to proclaim the
maxims of true wisdom."
9
"How fleeting a thing is all the good and evil of
the multitude! But wisdom has naught to do with
Fortune."
ia
x
Ib., p. 194, sent. 46.
2
Epicurea, p. 308, 19; c). Wotke, /. ., p. 196, sent. 60.
3
/&., p. 162, 4.
*
/&., p. 307, 19.
6
Ib., p. 309, 26. 6
Ib., p. 162, 18. 7 Tb.9 p. 37> 9-
8
16., 169, 14. 9 Wotke, Wiener Studien, X, p. 194, sent. 41.
10
Epicurea, p. 307, 3.
192 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
"The repose of most men is a lethargy and their
activity a madness."
l
"Though he is being tortured on the rack, the wise
man is still happy."
2
"Ifthe wise man is being burned, ifhe is being tor-
tured nay, within the very bull of Phalaris, he will
say
:
*
How delightful this is ! How little care I for it !
" ' 3
Many critics before and after the time of Cicero
concur with Cicero himself in treating this famous
utterance as unjustifiable exaggeration or even as
mere sentimental rhodomontade. But a French
scholar
4
has recently called attention to a remark-
able fact. Modern psychology seems to show that,
given the right set of conditions, Epicurus was, after
all, right. Even now we know very little of the ex-
tent to which the mind, under the obsession of cer-
tain ideas, can ignore or even be unconscious ofwhat
goes on in the body.
"It is the wise man alone who will feel gratitude
to his friends, but to them equally whether they are
present or absent."
5
"Ifyou live by nature, you will never be poor; if
by opinion, you will never be rich." 6
"Great wealth is but poverty when matched with
the law of nature." 7
" If any one thinks his own not to be most ample,
he may become lord of the whole world and will yet
be wretched/" 8
"With many the acquisition of riches is not an end
to their miseries but only a change."
9
1
Wotke, Wiener Studien, X, p. 192, sent. n.
*Epicurea, p. 338, i. *
Ib., p. 338, 4 sqq.*V. Brochard, in Uannee philosophique for 1903. The article Is en-
tilled La Morale&Epicure. See especially pp. 8-12.
5
Epicwrea, p. 335, i. e
Ib., p. 161, 19.
7
/&., p. 303, 24.8
75., p. 302, 29. /&., p. 304, 23; cf. ib., 304, 19.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 193
"The perturbation of the soul is not removed nor
any considerable joy produced by the possession
either of the greatest wealth or ofhonour and reputa-
tion with the multitude or by anything else due to
indeterminate causes."
l
"Happiness and blessedness do not consort with
extent of wealth or weight of responsibilities or
public office or power, but with painlessness, with
mildness of feeling, and that disposition of soul
which defines what is according to nature."
2
"Trust me, your words (professions ofphilosophy)
will sound grander in a common bed and a rough
coverlet; they will not be merely spoken then, they
will be proved true."
3
"The knowledge of sin is the beginning of salva-
tion."
4
"The first duty of salvation is to preserve our
vigour and to guard against the defiling of our life
in consequence ofmaddening desires/' 5
"It is an evil thing to live in necessity, but there is
no necessity to live in necessity."
8
"Let us not accuse the flesh as the cause of great
evils, neither let us attribute our distresses to out-
ward things. Let us rather seek the causes of this
distress within our souls, and let us cut off every
vain craving and hope for things which are fleeting,
and let us become wholly masters of ourselves. For
a man is unhappy either from fear or from unlimited
and vain desires, but if a man bridle these he may
secure for himself the blessing of reason. In so far
as thou art in distress, thou art in distress because
1
Wotke, Wiener Studien, X, p. 198, sent. 81.
3 Usener, Epicurea, p. 325, 30.
3
Epicurea, p. 162, 25.
* Ib.y p. 318, 12.
6
Wotke, Wiener Studien, p. 198, sent. 80.
5
Epicurea> p. 306, 7; also Wotke, Wiener Studien, p. 191, sent. 9.
194 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
thou hast forgotten Nature, for thou layest upon thy-
self fears and desires which have no limits. And it
were better for thee to have no fears and to lie upon
a bed of straw, than to have a golden couch and
lavish table, yet to be troubled in mind."
1
"Give thanks to Nature, the blessed, because she
hath made necessary things easy to procure, while
things hard to be obtained are not necessary/'
3
"By the love of true philosophy every troublous
and painful desire is destroyed/*
3
"Ifyou wish to make Pythocles happy, add not to
his riches, but take away from his desires."
4
"No one of the foolish is content with what he has,
but rather he is distressed on account ofwhat he has
not. Just as those who are fever-stricken are always
athirst, owing to the severity of their disease, and
desire things of the most opposite kinds, so those
who are sick in soul are always in need ofeverything,
and through their excessive craving they fall head-
long into manifold desires/*
5
"Nothing is enough for him to whom enough is
too little." 8
"Cheerful poverty is an honourable thing."
7
"Having bread and water, I revel in the pleasure
of the body, and I loathe the pleasures of costly
living, not on their own account, but because of the
inconveniences which follow them."
8
"We strive after independence, not that in all
cases we may use that which is cheap and plain, but
that we may have no anxiety as to such matters." 9
"We must select some good man and keep him
1
Epicurea, p. 291, 9; 305, 33; 161, 29; 163, 4.
*/&., p. 300, 26. 3
/&., p. 296, 12. */&., p. 143, 3.6
/&., p. 300, 12. 6
Wotke, Wiener Studien, p. 197, sent. 68.
1
Epicurea, p. 303, 8. !&., p. I56, 4. n>., p. 34S, 30.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 195
ever before our eyes, that so we may live as if he
were beholding us, and may do everything as if in
his sight."
*
"Do everything as if Epicurus saw you."
2
"Reverence for the wise man is a great good for
the reverer."
3
"The wise man will not punish his slaves, but will
take pity on them, and will show consideration to
any that are zealous/'
4
"Turn not away from the prayer of thine enemy
when he is in distress, yet take heed to thyself, for
he is no better than a dog."
&
"Nobility is best brought out in wisdom and
friendship, whereof the one, wisdom, is an immortal;
the other, friendship, a mortal good."
8
"We ought to look round for people to eat and
drink with before we look for something to eat and
drink; feeding without a friend is the life of a lion
or a wolf."
7
"Sweet is the memory of the friend who is dead."
8
Upon politics and the pursuit of fame Epicurps is
very plain-spoken.
"I never wished to please the people; for that
which I know, the people does not approve; and
what the people approves, that I know not."
9
"Man is not by nature adapted for living in civic
communities and in civilisation."
10
"The wise man will be fond of living in the
country."
u
I
Epicurea, p. 163, 18. Compare tbe similar precept of Epctetus
given above, Chapter IV, p. 115.
* Ib.t p. 163, 26.
3
Wotke, Wiener Studien, X, p. 193, sent. 32.
4
Epfcwea, p. 335, 14-
5
*&-, p- 164, 21.
;
6
Wotke, /. c., p. 197, sent 78.
7
Epicurea, p. 324, 25.
8
Tb., p. 164, 6. s
J&., p. 157, 26. * /&., p- 3*7* 9-
II B> P- 331, 5-
196 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
"The wise man will take just so much thought
for fame as to avoid being despised."
l
"
I have said this not to many persons, but to thee,
for we are a large enough theatre one to the other." 2
"Amid so many blessings, it has done us no harm
that our glorious Greece not only does not know us,
but has hardly heard of us."
3
"Epicurus spurns under his feet the achievements
of Themistocles and Miltiades, and makes them
cheap.
, . . The Epicureans name statesmen only
to ridicule them and to destroy their fame, saying
that Epaminondas had some merit in him, but it
was small or 'wee' such is the word they use
while they nickname him 'Iron Bowels,' and ask
what possessed him to go marching through the
middle of the Peloponnesus, and why he did not sit
at home with a woollen cap on his head."
4
But Epicuruswas no harder on the great Athenians
than Plato had been before him in the Gorgias.
The following extracts are controversial and directed
against the Stoics:
"Epicurus makes a jest ofour distinctions between
'what is honourable' and 'what is base/ and says we
are taken up with words and utter mere empty
sounds. He says that he does not understand what
'honourable conduct' means, if it be not a thing
accompanied by pleasure, unless, perchance, it mean
what is praised by the popular breath. The praise
ofmen, Epicurus says, is sought after for the sake of
pleasure/'
5
"Ask Epicurus, and he will say that moderate pain
is a greater evil than the utmost disgrace/'
8
p. 331, 12. *
Ib., p. 63, 7.
3
Ib., p. 58, 13.
4
Ib,, p. 329, 13 sqqn 16 sqq.
& Ib.} p. 340, 32 sqq.; 123, 4 sqq.
Q
Ib., p. 326, 14,
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 197
"Courage is a thing enslaved to fashions, and to
the blame ofmen, and shaped by foreign opinion and
notions; you practise courage, and you encounter
hardships and dangers, not because you have no fear
ofthem, but because you are still more afraid ofthose
other things."
1
Here again we are reminded of Plato, who in the
Pln&do disparages civic or popular courage (that is,the
virtue of the ordinary citizen as distinct from that of
the philosopher) on precisely the same grounds, that
it is inspired by fear. But there is this difference,
that Plato, who upheld the absolute value of true
courage, as of the other virtues, would cultivate and
develop even its imperfect and inadequate manifesta-
tions; while Epicurus, who denied the absolute value
of virtue, and made it simply a means to pleasure,
is free to reject it whenever it does not conduce to
that end.
This chaptermay fitly close with a few more glean-
ings from the sayings of Epicurus:"There is no need to spoil the present by longing
for what is not; rather reflect that even what you
have was beyond your expectations."
"Envy no one; the good do not merit it, while as
for the wicked, the more they prosper, the more harm
they do to themselves."
" It is vain to ask the gods for whatwe can procure
for ourselves/'
"Confront every desire with this question: What
shall I gain by gratifying this desire and what shall
I lose by suppressing it ?**
"The man of tranquil mind causes no annoyance
either to himself or to others." 2
1
Epicttrea, p. 317, lines 4 sqq. of Notes.
* Wotke, Wiener Studies, X, pp. 194 sqq-*^ntt- 35> 53 65, 71, 79-
198 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
It is worth while to make an effort to discover the
real Epicurus, to understand what manner ofman he
was. Our best materials are his own writings. The
letter to Menoeceus has already been translated; that
to Herodotus will occupy us in the next chapter, per-
haps to the weariness and impatience of the reader.
These letters together with other fragmentary records
certainly convey the impression of a strong person-
ality. We see that Epicurus had a logical mind, was
a great systematiser, belonged, in short, to the class of
daring and self-confident innovators. Like others of
this class, he felt that he had a mission, and under
great difficulties, in face ofmuch opposition, laboured
with unremitting industry to accomplish a self-im-
posed task. It may not be amiss to compare him
with other such men. If amid great differences
points ofresemblance are disclosed, these may enable
us to fill in the outlines ofour mental picture and to
form a better judgment of Epicurus himself. For
this purpose we select two eminent modern philoso-
phers, Jeremy Bentham and Herbert Spencer, men
who far surpassed the Athenian sage in the greatness
of their aims and achievements, but yet may be said,
in a sense, to have continued his work and to have
sustained, in later ages and under altered conditions,
the same cause.
Bentham lived the life of a recluse as much as
Epicurus. The great influence he exercised was due
solely to his writings. We are told that his constitu-
tion was weakly in childhood, but strengthened with
advancing years so as to allow him to get through an
incredible amount of sedentary labour, while he re-
tained to the last the fresh and cheerful temperament
of a boy. This might be said almost word for word
of Epicurus.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 199
Bentham was able to gather around him a group
of congenial friends and pupils; so did Epicurus.
Though not a morose visionary, he thought general
society a waste of rime, disliked poetry as misrepre-
sentation, but gave good dinners, delighted in country
sights, and in making others happy. We have seen
that each one of these traits is reproduced in our
accounts of Epicurus. When Rush, at that time
the American minister in England, visited Bentham
at the Hermitage, he tells us that he was received
with the simplicity ofa philosopher amid shrubberies
and flowers, green and large shaded walks. So, we
may well believe, were visitors received by Epicurus
in his gardens. Rush further records that Bentham
had the benevolence of manner suited to the phil-
anthropy of his mind. The visitor to Epicurus
would, we may be sure, have said the same. Ben-
tham*s conversation revealed a typically logical as
opposed to a historical mind, a contempt for the past,
and a wish to be clear of all association with it.
The same trait is suggested by what we learn of
Epicurus,who evidently believed hewas inaugurating
a new era in which the search for happiness might
at last be prosecuted with success.
Turning now to Spencer, one of the most striking
features of his character was the small weight he
attached to authority or, to be more exact, his utter
disregard of it. Professed apologists admit this.
1
The prominence of the same trait in Epicurus is
unmistakable. As we have seen, he avowed that he
was self-taught, and did not scruple to assail the most
eminent of his predecessors with merciless ridicule.
As Spencer grew up to manhood, his constitutional
proneness to set authority at defiance became, we are
1
Ufe, by Duncan, c. XXIX, p. 489-
200 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
told, less an instinctive impulse and more a matter
ofprinciple. In his thinking, as well as in his acting,
he set authority at naught. That with Epicurus also
contempt for authority was a matter of principle is
very obvious. "All my life long/' writes Spencer, "I
have been a thinker and not a reader, being able to
say with Hobbes that 'if I had read as much as other
men I should have known as little/
" 1
Epicurus
would have indorsed this sentiment, as Heraclitus
had done before him. But Spencer's disregard of
authority was, we are told, a disregard of personal
authority only, and was accompanied by a whole-
hearted fealty to principles. So too emphatically
with Epicurus. Spencer's father wrote of him: "It
appears to me that the laws ofnature are to him what
revealed religion is to us, and that any wilful infrac-
tion of those laws is to him as much a sin as to us is
disbelief in what is revealed."
2
His biographer in-
sists that though Spencer did not accept the dogmas
of any creed, he was, in the truest sense, religious.
"To pay homage to royal persons, while showing
little respect for the principles that underlie human
society, drew fromhim the reproof:
*
It is so disloyal/
To bend the knee and utter praise to a Divine person,
while ignoring the principles of religion and morality,
met with a similar condemnation: 'It is so irre-
ligious/
" 3
This may help us better to understand
the position of Epicurus on the subject of religion.
With all his outspoken condemnation ofthe prevailing
polytheism, he claimed for himself and his followers
the possession of the only true and genuine piety.
Indeed, the approximation is yet closer than at first
appears. No one can read his own fragmentary
utterances,much less the splendid poem of Lucretius,
1
Duncan, p. 490.
*
Ib., p. 491.
* Ib.t p. 490.
EPICURUS AND HEDONISM 201
without perceiving a deep undertone of religious
fervour. It was impious, they held, to acquiesce in
the popular faith, but it is not in the reverence due to
the shadowy deities of the intermundia that their
religious spirit finds its true manifestation. The laws
of nature, fcedera nature, excite, especially in the
Roman poet, a higher emotion, a more reverent awe.
The comparison holds good of less pleasing traits.
Spencer, his biographer admits, had an abundant
share of self-confidence. "The possible failure of
any of his many inventions was seldom taken into
account. His doctrines were from the outset deemed
secure against attack, notwithstanding repeated ex-
periences of having to modify or enlarge or restrict
his previous expositions. On Spencer, accustomed
to think and act for himself,
c
the other side* did not
obtrude."
l
It is hardly necessary to point out that all
this is eminently true of Epicurus, whose confidence
in himselfagain and again becomes arrogance, while
his dogmatismwas not "occasional
55
but a permanent
habit. Had this not been the case, he would never
have rejected the natural necessity of Democritus
with such scorn, would never have excogitated the
declination of the atom, to say nothing of other less
serious errors. Galton writes of Spencer: "He
loved to dogmatise from a priori axioms'
5
how true
this is of Epicurus "and to criticise, and I soon
found that the way to get the best from him was to be
patient and not to oppose.
55 2 The subservience of
the Epicurean brotherhood to the master was pro-
verbial in antiquity; the man who expected his
disciples to get his doctrines by heart and memorise
the epitomes he prepared for their use must have had
more than Spencer's share of dogmatism. But the
1
Duncan, p. 492.
2!k p. 501 *
202 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
two resembled each other in more important matters,
in the passion for systematisation, the determination
to deduce, so far as possible, all the consequences of
one wide-reaching principle; again, in freedom from
worldly ambition and in whole-hearted devotion to
their task. Spencer often spoke, we are told, as ifhe
had a mission, a message to deliver to mankind. We
have noticed the same trait in Epicurus and it is a
clue to much of his conduct.
No one can be better aware than the present writer
that the foregoing coincidences are useful only by
way ofillustration and must be taken cum grano salts.
Historical parallels, however interesting, are apt to be
purely fanciful. At the best they have little inde-
pendent value, just because so much depends upon
the point ofview from which the comparison is made.
CHAPTER VI
THE ATOMIC THEORY
Science has been defined as ordered knowledge of
phenomena and the relations between them. There
can be no doubt that the beginnings of modern
science go back to the Greeks; in certain depart-
ments, such as geometry, astronomy, and medicine,
the affiliation and transmission of ideas is particu-
larly well attested. We must not, however, over-
look the great difference between the position of the
Greeks and that of the modern inquirer. The latter
has at his command instruments and appliances of
wonderful accuracy and precision for making ob-
servations and experiments. The ancients had no
microscope, no telescope, no scientific apparatus of
any sort save the carpenter's rule and a pair of com-
passes. In our days every new theory can be
directly tested by comparison with the store of facts
already accumulated through the ages. With the
Greeks this was not so. So scanty was their knowl-
edge that they seldom had at hand any means of
checking a new theory beyond the phenomena
which it was invented to explain. Under such cir-
cumstances, it was inevitable that conjecture and
discussion should usurp the part now played by
observation and experiment. In science then, as in
metaphysics now, each thinker had his own system,
starting anew with first principles and reaching con-
clusions which had no more validity than the prem-
203
204 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
isses. The reader must be careful, then, not to con-
fuse ancient atomism with the modern atomic theory,
which from the time of Dalton has found its place in
the text-books of chemistry. The modern concep-
tion of atoms and molecules serves to explain certain
definite and detailed facts of chemistry and physics.
The theory is the best working hypothesis which the
science of Dalton's time could excogitate for explain-
ing them, and until the discovery of Rontgen rays
and the radio-active properties of certain substances
it held the field. What modifications it will undergo
in the physics ofthe future no man of science will be
bold enough to predict. The modern atomic theory,
then, was suggested by and meant to explain cer-
tain indisputable definite facts of chemical com-
bination and gaseous volume. But these facts were
unknown to the ancient Atomists. They put for-
ward their theory at a time when men's minds were
busy, not with the laws of combination of seventy or
eighty known elements, but with more fundamental
and far-reaching problems. They were in quest of
some permanent and primary element which by its
transformations would account for the variety of
nature. Controversy raged over the question, more
ontological than physical, whether one such primary
element should be assumed or more than one or an
infinite number. Some thought they had discovered
it in water, some in air, some in fire. It might seem
that no progress could be made on these lines, yet
gradually there emerged the conception of primary
matter with three properties. It must be (i) inde-
structible or quantitatively constant, (2) immutable
or qualitatively constant, and (3) impenetrable.
Empedocles assumed four elements, earth, water,
air, and fire; Anaxagoras, an infinity of qualita-
THE ATOMIC THEORY 205
rively unlike particles. Leucippus, the earliest ofthe
Atomists, postulated an infinite number of primary
particles, homogeneous and indivisible, but quantita-
tively different, that is, differing only in shape and
size. Already Empedocles had derived the endless
difference in things known to sense from the varying
combination and separation of his four elements;
Leucippus now resolved the qualitative differences
of things into quantitative differences, that is, into
varieties of position, order, and arrangement of com-
bining atoms, and the different sizes and shapes of
the atoms themselves.
Of any scientific theory we are entitled to ask:
Is it fruitful ? Does it point out the way for further
inquiry ? Does it explain one set of phenomena
in terms of something simpler ? The atomic the-
ory possessed these merits in a high degree. Tried
by every test, from the stand-point of modern sci-
ence it evinces its superiority to all its rivals. And
yet it was never popular; we may even say it was
unpopular and discredited in antiquity. In this re-
spect it shared the fate of that other great dis-
covery of the Greeks, the heliocentric hypothesis
in astronomy. Both alike were uncongenial Greek
prejudices and made their appearance long before
the world at large was prepared to appreciate them;
for the path of progress is not always a straight
line, but often more nearly resembles a spiral.
Whatever the cause, the mechanical explanation of
nature was abandoned by Plato and Ajristode, the
acutest intellects ofthe time, in favour ofa teleological
system. It was no slight feat to have reduced the
world of physical change to modes of matter in
motion. But to their main hypothesis the Atomists
attached certain corollaries not so well calculated to
206 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
command universal assent. Body, they held, is the
sole reality; nothing incorporeal exists. Motion,
again, was taken to be the sole form ofenergy. And
here we may be permitted to remark that the history
of modern physical theories as to the constitution of
the sensible world is little more than an account of
the way in which energy has gradually taken its
place alongside of matter as an equally real thing
and has tended more and more to replace it altogether.
But to the early Atomists in the infancy of science
matter and energy were still undistinguished under
the single conception of body; body was the form in
which both were imagined. The existence of body
is attested by the senses, but motion, in the view of
Leucippus and his great follower Democritus, was
inconceivable apart from empty space or void, to
which they also attributed existence. Here, again,
we may note that the meaning of the term existence
is enlarged, for the mode of existence of space is not
the same as that of body. Moreover, the existence
ofempty space or vacuum is not directly attested by
the senses, but reached by reasoning. It is instruc-
tive to compare the procedure ofthose acute reasoners
the Eleatics, who undoubtedly influenced all the
physical theories subsequent to them. They argued
thus: Motion is impossible without a vacuum;
there is no vacuum; ergo, there is no motion. Ac-
cordingly, the Eleatic Parmenides regarded the
phenomenal world of change and motion as mere
illusive appearance. In his view there is no other
ultimate reality but the one immutable Being.
Leucippus and Democritus may be supposed to
argue from the same premiss thus: Motion is im-
possible without a vacuum; there is undoubtedly
motion^ for the senses attest it; ergoy there is vacuum,
THE ATOMIC THEORY 207
or empty space. But this is a conclusion of reason,
precisely as the Eleatic one immutable Being is a
conclusion of reason. The senses no more tell us
directly of the one than of the other. Thus, on the
possibility of morion and the existence of void,
Eleatics and Atomists are diametrically opposed; but
in spite of this the atom of Democritus inherits most
of the characteristics which the Eleatics claimed for
their one immutable Being,
This system Epicurus found ready to his hand,
and with this he was satisfied. Only modifications
in detail were required to adapt it to his purpose.
The writings of Leucippus and Democritus, with the
exception of a few fragments, have perished. Al-
most all our knowledge in detail of their speculations
is derived from the form given to them by Epicurus
and by his follower, the Roman Lucretius, in his
celebrated poem, On the Nature of Things. That
marvellous work has made a deep and lasting
impression on the modern world, particularly on
men of science. They have vied with one another
in extolling the poet's firm grasp of scientific prin-
ciples, his clear conception of law in the physical
universe, his sympathetic and penetrating observa-
tion, his unrivalled power of bringing together scat-
tered factsand embracing them In one comprehensive
view, his bold use ofthe scientific imagination, his in-
sight into multitudinous hidden processes and mo-
tions on too small a scale to be seen, which yet in
every way conform to the processes and motions on
a larger scale attested by our senses. Itwas natural,
therefore, that Lucretius himself or, at any rate, his
master, Epicurus, should be proclaimed as the one
true scientific thinker of antiquity. But it is not
properly to them that such praise belongs. The
208 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
system unfolded in the poem did not originate with
the poet or with his master. So far as we can judge,
they added very little of real worth; some of their
alterations were for the worse, and in one particular
they came very near to imperilling the very founda-
tions of the system. The credit to which Epicurus
is justly entitled is that of having made a wise selec-
tion. Among conflicting theories he chose to stand
by the mechanical conception of the physical uni-
verse, when it had fallen into disfavour, and unhesi-
tatingly rejected the fashionable teleology. His doing
so testifies to his acute intellect and critical insight,
but still more to the honesty, fearlessness, and inde-
pendence with which he invariably followed his con-
victions. He also popularised the system he adopted
and lent it a new lease of life. So much will be
readily admitted, but an impartial estimate of his
services cannot go beyond this. He made no dis-
coveries in science himself, nor did any Epicurean
after him. He rather discouraged the prosecution
of physical inquiries of any sort beyond a certain
point. His attitude to natural science as a whole
deserves careful consideration. He takes it up
because, ifwe are to be happy, we must be released
from mental trouble, above all from groundless
fears, more particularly the terrors of superstition,
the fear of the gods, and the dread of death. With-
out this strong impelling motive Epicurus would
never have engaged in the study of nature at all.
His sole aim is to convince himself that these terrors
are unreal and imaginary, and if, incidentally, he dis-
covers a great deal about the constitution of the
world and man's place in nature, it is because he
cannot otherwise banish these terrors from the mind.
Scientific investigation is permissible only so far as it
THE ATOMIC THEORY 209
conduces to this end by laying down the true place
of man in the system of things. Beyond this there
is no need to go. The laboratories, museums, ob-
servatories, and other appliances of modern times
for research and discovery, would thus be con-
demned in anticipation as superfluous. Knowledge
in itself and for its own sake he regarded as of lit-
tle worth. And this was no mere passing phase;
it expressed the man's fundamental and settled con-
viction.
Reference has already been made to certain icono-
clastic tendencies of Epicurus. We have seen that
he disparaged the education which he, like other
Greeks, had received at school. Literature fared no
better. The whole poetic art he abhorred as "the
deadly bait of fiction/' In this sweeping condem-
nation he agrees with one phase of Plato's many-
sided development, represented in the tenth book of
the Republic. In banishing the poets both philos-
ophers were actuated by the same narrow fanatical
spirit which led the Puritans to shut up the theatres
in the interests ofmorality. The rejection ofmathe-
matical studies is, at first sight, harder to explain.
The fact, however, is certain. Before he became an
Epicurean, Polyaenus had made great progress in
mathematics; after his conversion we are told that
he gave them up and unlearned the science. The
reason alleged is that in the view of Epicurus, geom-
etry, astronomy, and kindred sciences rested on false
premisses, and could not, therefore, lead to true re-
sults. His concern was with the real world, in which
he could nowhere find points, lines, and surfaces, as
defined by the geometer. Again, he could not
understand why infinities should not all be equal;
he invariably treated them as if they were equal.
210 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
And why were line and surface bound to be con-
tinuous ? Why could they not be reduced to succes-
sions or series ofdiscrete, discontinuous magnitudes ?
The same objection to the foundations of geometry
had already been made by the sophist Protagoras,
who in his work on mathematics attacked the hy-
potheses of the science because they contradicted
our sensible impressions. Thus Protagoras held that
there was no such thing in nature as a straight line
or a perfect circle, and denied that the tangent to a
sphere touched it only at a single point. If this ob-
jection were valid, the whole of geometry would be a
pretended science, which has nothing in real existence
for its subject-matter. The same line of attack was
afterward developed by the Sceptics, as we learn
from Sextus Empiricus. It must be carefully dis-
tinguished from the reasons forwhich the antagonistic
schools of Cynics and Cyrenaics for once united in
rejecting the mathematical sciences. The ground of
complaint of these Socratics was the inutility of the
study. None of its students were made morally
better by their proficiency. As Aristippus urged,
caricaturing, if not echoing, the methods of Socrates:
"
Everycommon mechanic has something to say in his
craft about good and evil, useful and useless, but
these practical considerations never enter into the
purview of the mathematician." Whether Epicurus
was also moved by these considerations of practical
utility, we are nowhere informed. Zeno of Sidon, a
laterEpicurean, attacked Euclidon differentgrounds,
arguing that the proofs were insufficient and the
definitions unsuitable, if not unintelligible; where-
upon the Stoic Posidonius took up the challenge and
wrote in defence of mathematics. In a similar spirit
at a later time the Stoic Cleomedes, in a work still
THE ATOMIC THEORY 211
extant, defended the current astronomy against Epi-
curean assaults.
Epicurus, however, has had his modern cham-
pions and we will state their case, which is far
stronger for astronomy than for geometry. Accord-
ing to them, the rejection of the current astron-
omy, instead of a reproach, is a crown of glory to
our philosopher, They call attention to the fact
that the science which he condemned was not the
astronomy of to-day, which rests upon exact obser-
vation and theories universally accepted, apart from
a handful of earth-flatteners, but something very
different. In his time such observations of planetary
movements as had been made were few and imper-
fect, and astronomywas a mass ofconflicting theories,
a field in which speculation, sometimes of the wild-
est sort, ran riot. Toward all such speculations he
adopted an attitude of cautious reserve. He did not
refuse to entertain any of the discordant explanations
of celestial phenomena then in vogue, but upon ex-
amining and comparing them he found no grounds
for preferring one to the other. Certain assumptions
granted, they were all more or less probable, they all
lacked convincing evidence, and Epicurus was de-
termined to believe nothing of which he was not
absolutely certain. Experiment being impossible,
he was content to take up an attitude of suspense,
excluding no possibility, but waiting for further evi-
dence. This modest attitude, it is maintained, is
more becoming to the true man of science than over-
hasty speculation, which jumps to conclusions.
Supposing this apology admitted for the rejection of
astronomy, what have we to say about the founda-
tions of geometry ? Here, too, some sort of a case
may be made out; for the controversy over Euclid,
212 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
his definitions, his common notions, his postulates,
and the whole basis of his science, we are reminded,
is still raging, and we may believe, ifwe choose, that
Epicurus, more far-sighted than his contemporaries,
discerned the weak places in the structure. But a
simpler explanation is far more probable. In the
miscellaneous works collected under the name of
Aristotle, there is a short tracton "Indivisible Lines/'
a model ofterse and closely reasoned argument. The
writer sets forth first the grounds on which such in-
divisible units of length are assumed by one set of
disputants, then he proceeds to retail the arguments
by which another set meet them and attempt to
refute them. Now the connection between mathe-
matics and the general theory of the natural world
which the ancients called physics was very close.
The indivisible atom was the basis of all Epicurean
physics. It seems highly probable, then, that Epi-
curus himself would incline to the assumption of an
indivisible unit of length, a sort of materialised point.
If this surmise be correct, he found himself at vari-
ance with what we may call the orthodox school of
geometers. Their fundamental notions of line and
point he could not accept, and, as they were involved
in the whole of geometry, he would feel bound to
condemn the science as false. As will hereafter be
seen, there is some evidence that he did not alto-
gether accept the continuity of motion, but rather re-
solved it into a series of progressions, each taking
place in an instant of time over an indivisible unit of
space. His denial of continuous corporeal magni-
tude would of itself suffice to bring him into collision
with the mathematicians; and this hostility would be
strengthened ifhe also inclined to regard space, time,
and motion as in the ultimate analysis not continuous,
but discontinuous as made up of discrete minima.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 213
But, be this as it may, it is high time to inquire
what scientific principles, if any, our philosopher ad-
mitted. He was certainly no sceptic. He did not
hold that every statement is uncertain, because as
much can be said against it as for it, and, as a neces-
sary consequence, that all science is founded on
nothing better than probability. On what general
principles, then, did he conceive himself entitled to
assert or believe anything ? This inquiry, prelimi-
nary to his physics, he himself entitled Canonic,
because it dealt with the canon or rule of evidence.
First, every statement must relate to what is given,
to facts or phenomena. Epicurus is not concerned
with the grounds on which from one proposition we
infer another, the subject of Aristotle's Analytic, but
with the far more fundamental question: On what
ultimate grounds is a statement of fact based ? All
phenomena are either immediately certain or not, and
it is possible to pass from the one regionwhere there
is immediate certainty to the other region, which
is not thus immediately certain; in other words, from
the known to the unknown. Such a process is"anal-
ogous to the modern induction. For deductive logic,
the theory of the syllogism and definition, Epicurus
had the utmost contempt. On the other hand, the
few general and preliminary remarks of which his
Canonic consists contain the germs of a thorough-
going inductive logic. The Epicurean theory of the
universe is built upon this foundation. The existence
of the phenomenal universe is everywhere assumed.
Things existoutside us. Weknowthem onlythrough
sense,which alone gives a conviction ofreality. This
conviction of reality attaches not only to the external
objects which are perceived, but with equal strength
to the internal states or feelings, especially the feelings
of pleasure and pain of which we are conscious.
214 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
All true belief and assertion, then, must be founded
upon our sensations and feelings. What we immedi-
ately perceive and feel, that is true.
"We must take into account," he says,
" what
really exists, and all clear evidence, to which we re-
fer our opinions, for otherwise all will be full of
uncertainty and confusion/' " If you fight against
all your sensations, you will have no standard to
which to refer and thus no means of judging even
those sensations which you pronounce false." " If
you reject absolutely any single sensation without
stopping to discriminate between that which is mat-
ter of opinion and awaits further confirmation and
that which is already present, whether in sensation
or in feeling or in any mental apprehension, you will
throw into confusion even the rest of your sensations
by your groundless belief, so as to reject the test of
truth altogether. If you hastily affirm as true all
that awaits confirmation in ideas based on opinion,
as well as that which does not, you will not escape
error, as you will be taking sides in every question
involving truth and error."1
Or, as Lucretius more
graphically expresses it: "You will find that from
the senses first has proceeded the knowledge of the
true and that the senses cannot be refuted. For
that which of itself is to be capable of refuting
things false by true things must from the nature
of the case be proved to have the higher certainty.
Well, then, what must fairly be accounted of higher
certainty than sense ? Shall reason founded on
false sense be able to contradict the senses, seeing
that reason is wholly founded upon them ? And if
they are not true, then all reason as well is rendered
false. Or shall the ears be able to take the eyes to
1
Golden maxims XXII-XXIV.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 215
task or the touch the ears ? Any one sense cannot
confute any other. No, nor can any sense take itself
to task, since equal credit must be assigned to it at all
times. What, therefore, has at any time appeared
true to each sense is true."
l
It is only through sense that we come into contact
with reality; hence all our sensations are witnesses
to reality. The senses cannot be deceived. There
can be no such thing, properly speaking, as sense-
illusion or hallucination. The mistake lies in the
misinterpretation of our sensations. What we sup-
pose that we perceive is too often our own mental
presupposition, our own over-hasty inference from
what we actually do perceive. When we see an oar
which is half immersed in water appear bent, the
image or film which reaches the eye is really bent,
but the judgment of the mind that the oar itself is
bent is no part of the perception, it is a gratuitous
addition to it. The mind confuses two quite dis-
tinct processes or movements, the perception which
is infallible, and the conscious or unconscious infer-
ence from it, which is after all mere presupposition
or opinion, a groundless belief. The region of cer-
tainty, then, confined as it is to the direct presentation
of sense, is even so by no means as extensive as we
might at first suppose. Sensations themselves must
be scrutinised, and the element which the mind itself
has added must be removed before we get back to
the original data, the perceptions which put us in
touch with reality.
Turning now to the other and vaster region of the
unknown, which is not accessible to direct observa-
tion because sensation is strictly limited to here and
now, we observe that some part of it may hereafter
1De Rerum Natura, IV, 478-499.
216 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
come within our ken and be directly observed. This
Epicurus denotes as "that which awaits confirma-
tion." Cognition is an interrogative process. We
put the question and wait until experience and re-
ality, under favourable circumstances, supply the
answer. But our knowledge, confined within these
limits, would be very inadequate. By what we have
above called an inchoate induction Epicurus regu-
lates the steps by which we anticipate all experience
with certainty. His fundamental assumption is the
uniformity of experience: that whatever occurs in
the sphere beyond knowledge must follow the same
laws of operation as what is known to occur within
the range of our experience. It is right, then, to
affirm about the unknown (i) what is confirmed and
witnessed to by the known, or at least (2) what is not
directly witnessed against by the known. Thus the
criterion, the supreme test of validity, is future ex-
perience, experience repeated or, at all events, not
contradicted. The second half of this canon is by no
means so sound as the first. It is capable of wide
application, and must allow many doubtful expla-
nations to pass for matters of belief. What is the
ground on which Epicurus believes that there is an
infinity ofworlds, that the blessed and immortal gods
inhabit the intermundia, that films from external
objects enter the sense-organs and the mind, thus
causing sensation and thought propositions for
which there is not a tittle of positive evidence ? His
reply is:
"
Nothing thatwe know by direct observa-
tion contradicts any one of these assertions/* And
so Epicurus gives them,wemay say, the benefitofthe
doubt.
Another caution is needed. If reasoning is to be
anything better than mere quibbling, special atten-
THE ATOMIC THEORY 217
don to language is necessary. Every term that is
used must call up a clear and distinct conception or
idea,which again must be based upon one clear and
distinct perception. To general terms, as we shall
hereafter see, correspond not single images, but the
resultant of an accumulated series of images, the
individual peculiarities of which are blunted and
fused in a single pictorial type, much in the same way
as when the photographs of different individuals are
superposed on each other in order to form a com-
posite photograph. But every perception in the series
must be clear and distinct, in order that the resultant
may have these qualities. In this way we obtain
what Epicurus called "preconceptions/* which take
their place beside perceptions and feelings. They
are the nearest approach which his system alloweid
to general notions. When a general term like "man"
is used, it calls up to the mind the preconception of
man, the generic type in which the images of particu-
lar men are fused and blended. With this explana-
tion and qualification we may even be permitted to
substitute "general notion" for "preconception/* al-
ways remembering that it is an inexact equivalent.
It remains to explain what precisely Epicurus under-
stood by reasoning in which general terms are used,
and what part it plays for him in the acquisition of
knowledge. Sense gives us the raw material of
knowledge in trustworthy perceptions and internal
feelings, but he never denied that we also attain
knowledge by the exercise of reason. Indeed, all
the more important propositions in the general theory
to be hereafter unfolded are attained by its aid.
Reason or reasoning is to him a mental operation,
which deals, not with particular things, but with
generic types or notions. If our knowledge did not
218 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
go beyond sensation it would consist in isolated,
particular facts. In that case it would be difficult,
ifnot impossible, to make the inductive leap from the
known to the unknown. Reasoning, then, is the ap-
plication, in a region where direct observation fails
us, ofpreconceptions or general notions derived from
sense, their validity being guaranteed by repeated
and uncontradicted experience. But future experi-
ence is the sole criterion by which all our reasoned
conclusions must be tested. The great doctrine of
atoms and void stands or falls by it. The claims of
reason and sense are thus adjusted. Instead of
subordinating sense to reason, Epicurus is bound by
the rules he lays down to subordinate reason to sense.
Conflict between them is really impossible, for, reason
being derived from sensation, all its conclusions are
controlled, checked, and verified at every turn by
sensation. Both, then, share in the making ofknowl-
edge. We see with the eye; we see also with the
mind. The latter is no doubt the means to the
knowledge ofphenomena beyond the reach of sense.
Only quantitative, not qualitative, difference, how-
ever, must be assumed between the two. The atoms
which we mentally perceive we might conceivably
actually perceive, if our senses were differently con-
stituted. They are in no way different from sensible
solids,except in minuteness, total absence ofvoid, and
consequent indivisibility. They are thus of a totally
different order of reality from those objects which
Plato believed the mind to cognise. Plato's ideas,
as incorporeal, were for Epicurus non-existent.
We have now to give in outline, so far as we can
in the words of Epicurus himself, his theory of the
sensible world. Where itwould conduce to clearness,
we can supplement the master's teaching as laid dawn
THE ATOMIC THEORY 219
in the letter to Herodotus from the poem ofLucretius.
The proposition from which we start is by no means
peculiar to the ancient Atomists but had long been
widely accepted. It amounts to an assertion of the
indestructibility of primary matter. This implies
that, when a particular thing comes into being, the
imperishable elements of things, whatever they be,
unite to form a new combination, and when this
combination is dissolved and the elements, them-
selves imperishable, which have been temporarily
united, again separate, the particular thing is de-
stroyed. Empedocles and Anaxagoras indorsed the
theory in this form as fully as the Atomists. Nor did
Heraclitus surrender the principle when in his doc-
trine of the perpetual flux of the sensible world he
took the obvious step from being and not-being to
the next category of becoming. What the propo-
sition excludes is capricious, arbitrary, random
agency; what it is feeling after and trying to ex-
press is orderly sequence in short, law in nature.
"To begin with," says Epicurus, "nothing comes
into being out of what is non-existent. For in that
case anything would have arisen out of anything,
standing in no need of its proper germs. And ifthat
which disappears were destroyed and became non-
existent, everything would have perished, there being
nothing into which things could have been dissolved.
Moreover, the sum total of things was always such
as it is now and such it will ever remain. For there
is nothing into which it can change. For outside the
sum of things there is nothing which could enter into
itand bring about the change/'
1
The terse summary
1
Letter toHerodotus, 38, Epiatrea, p. 5, L 13 sqq. The letter toHerod-
otus is given by Diogenes Laertius, Book X, 35-83, and is reprinted
in Usener, Epiatrea, pp. 3-32. I follow throughout the orderof the text.
220 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of Lucretius, Ex nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse
revertty has passed into a proverb.
Epicurus goes on to state succinctly what is the
kernel of his whole doctrine. Not only do atoms and
void exist, but atoms and void are all that exists.
"The whole of being, then, consists of bodies and
space. The existence of bodies is everywhere at-
tested by sense, and it is upon sensation that reason
must rely when it attempts to infer the unknown
from the known. If there were no space, which we
call also room, void, and intangible existence, bodies
would have nothing in which to be and through
which to move, as they are plainly seen to move.
Beyond bodies and space there is nothing which by
mental apprehension or on its analogy we can con-
ceive to exist. Here we are speaking of wholes or
separate things as distinct from their essential and
accidental qualities. Of bodies, some are composite,
others the elements ofwhich these composite bodies
are made. These elements are indivisible and un-
changeable; and necessarily so, if things are not all
to be destroyed and pass into non-existence, but are
to be strong enough to endure when the composite
bodies are broken up, because they possess a solid
nature, and are incapable of being anywhere or any-
how dissolved. It follows that the first beginnings
must be indivisible, corporeal entities/*
1
The word here translated "indivisible
5*
is identical
with the word for "atom/
5
Etymologically, "atom"
means simply "indivisible thing/' a thing which can-
not be cut in two. "Body," the reader must ob-
serve, is not unambiguous in Epicurus and Lucretius.
Giussani's proposals for the transposition of certain sections seem un-
convincing and are certainly confusing.
1
Letter to Herodotus, 39, E-picurea> p. 6, 5 sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 221
Properly speaking, atoms alone are bodies, for they
alone of existent things have no admixture of void in
them; but the term is extended to denote the com-
posite things in which along with body proper, /. <?.,
the atoms, there are also found interstices of void.
All the things which we perceive by the senses belong
to this class of composite bodies. To express atoms
themselves, Lucretius uses a variety of terms, such
as "elements," "first bodies," "first beginnings of
things," sometimes even "seeds," or singly, "bodies,"
where the context renders the term unambiguous.
What Epicurus means by essential and accidental
qualities is well illustrated by Lucretius. "For
whatever things are named, you will either find to be
properties linked to these two things," viz., to bodies
and void, "or you will see to be accidents of these
things. That is a property," z. <?., an essential
quality, "which can in no case be disjoined and
separated without utter destruction accompanying
the severance, such as the weight of a stone, the heat
of fire, the fluidity of water. Slavery, on the other
hand, poverty and riches, liberty, war, concord, and
all other things which may come and go while the
nature of the thing remains unharmed, these we are
wont, as it is right we should, to call accidents."
l
The subject will recur again in Epicurus.
2
He now gives his reasons for believing the sum of
things to be infinite. "The sum of things is in-
finite. For what is finite has an extremity, and the
extremity ofanything is discerned only by comparison
with something else. Now the sum of things is not
discerned by comparison with anything else; hence,
since it has no extremity it fias no limit, and since
it has no limit it is unlimited or infinite. Moreover,
1
Lucretius, I, 449 sqq.
222 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the sum of things is infinite both by reason of the
multitude of atoms and the extent of void. For, if
void were infinite and bodies finite, the bodies would
not have stayed anywhere, but would have been
dispersed in their course through the infinite void,
because they would not have met with anything
which by coming into collision with them might
support or check them. Again, if void were finite,
the infinity of bodies would not have had anywhere
to be."
1
Epicurus now describes his atoms, their shapes,
and their incessant motion. "The atoms, which
have no void in them, out ofwhich composite bodies
arise and into which they are dissolved vary indefi-
nitely in their shapes, for so many varieties of things
aswe see could neverhave arisen outofthe recurrence
of a definite number ofthe same shapes. The atoms
of each shape are absolutely infinite, but the variety
of shapes, though indefinitely great, is not absolutely
infinite. The atoms are everlastingly in motion.
Some of them rebound to a considerable distance
from each other; other atoms merely oscillate when
they have got entangled or are enclosed by a mass
of other atoms shaped for entangling. This is be-
cause each atom is separated from the rest by void,
which is incapable of offering any resistance to the
rebound; while it is the solidity of the atom which
makes it rebound after a collision, however short the
distance to which it rebounds when it finds itself
imprisoned in a mass of entangling atoms. Of all
this there is no beginning, owing to the eternity of
both atoms and void."
2
The subject of the stapes of atoms is treated very
fully by Lucretius. He begins thus: "Now mark,
1
41, Epicurea, 7, 6 sqq.
*
42-44 Epicurea, 7, 17 sqg.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 223
and next in order apprehend of what kind and how
widely differing in their forms are the beginnings
of all things/' /. <?., the atoms, "how varied by mani-
fold diversities of shape; not that a scanty number
are possessed of a like form" (/. *., instead of being
few, the atoms of a like shape are infinite in number,
as Lucretius subsequently proves; nevertheless all
the atoms are not cast in a single mould; they have
various shapes and sizes), "but because as a rule
they do not all resemble one the other. And no
wonder; for since there is so great a store of them
that, as I have shown, there is no end or sum, they
must sure enough not one and all be marked by
an equal bulk and like shape, one with another/'
*
By way of illustration he appeals to the fact that
the subtle fire of lightning passes through openings
through which earthly fire cannot pass. Hence he
infers that lightning is composed of finer atoms.
Light is transmitted through horn, which is imper-
vious to rain. The atoms of light, then, must be
finer than those ofrain. Wine runs easily, oil slowly
through a strainer: ergo, the atoms of oil are larger
and more hooked than those of wine. Honey and
milk are pleasant to the taste,wormwood and the like,
nauseous; the former consist of smooth, the latter of
jagged atoms, which tear away into the body. And,
generally, whatever affects the sense pleasantly or
unpleasantly must be formed of atoms more or less
smooth or rough, respectively. Again, some things
with a bitter flavour have atoms not hooked but
slightly prominent; those of fire and cold are jagged,
but in different ways, as shown by touch. Those of
stones, metals, and the like are hooked and branch-
ing, those of fluids smooth and round; those of
1
H, 333 sqq-
224 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
smoke, mist, and flame, sharp but not tangled; while
in sea-water round and rough atoms are mingled
with round and smooth ones.
What Epicurus says about the motion of his atoms
is not very clear. We may supplement it from
Lucretius, whose account is as follows: "Sure
enough no rest is given to first bodies throughout
the unfathomable void, but driven on rather in
ceaseless and varied motion they partly, after they
have pressed together, rebound leaving great spaces
between, while in part they are so dashed away after
the stroke as to leave but small spaces between. And
all which form a denser aggregation when brought
together, and which rebound leaving trifling spaces
between, held fast by their own close-tangled shapes
these form enduring bases of stone and unyielding
bodies of iron and the rest of their class, few in
number, which travel onward along the great void.
All the others spring far off and rebound far, leaving
great spaces between; these furnish us with thin air
and bright sunlight. And many more travel along
the great void, which have been thrown off from the
unions of things or, though admitted to such unions,
have yet in no case been able likewise to assimilate
their motions."
1
The drift seems to be that we can imagine three
conditions in which atoms find themselves: (i) free
atoms, moving singly in space before and after col-
lision; (2) atoms, once free, which after collision are
entangled or interlaced, owing to difference of shape,
with other atoms. When a shell of such entangled
atoms has been formed, it may enclose (3) im-
prisoned atoms, only partially free, collidingwith each
other, but only rebounding to short distances because
1
II, 95 sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 225
they cannot escape from the network ofthe entangled
mass or shell within which they are confined. The
difference between (2; and (3) can be illustrated
from the physical constitution of sensible bodies, all
of which, as seen above, are composite, having in-
terstices of void between their constituent atoms.
In gases the atmosphere is the most familiar case
and probably also in liquids, the cohesion of the
parts is imperfect, and the system formed by the
constituent atoms requires, if it is to maintain even
this imperfect cohesion, to be enclosed within definite
bounds. Otherwise their constituent atoms, so im-
perfectly do they cohere, always tend to disperse
and become once more free. The only bounds
which we can imagine in the case of the air are the
"flaming wails" of our world. For liquids these
bounds are the sides of the vessel containing them.
The case is different with the great majority of com-
posite bodies commonly denoted as solid, metals,
stones, etc., the component atoms of which have
become so closely entangled that they are not easily
separated. The degree of cohesion, then, depends
upon the closeness of the entanglement, and this in
the last resort upon the shape of the atoms. There
is one point on which more information would have
been welcome. When, in consequence of collision,
atoms have become entangled or interlaced, what is
the exact nature of their motion? AH the atoms,
we are told, are everlastingly in motion; but there are
no details to show how precisely the motion of two
or more entangled atoms such, for instance, as
these^^ differs from the motion of a single free
or unimprisoned atom. In the densest substance
known, so long as they are composite bodies there
are interstices of void. Even the atoms in a piece of
226 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
steel are everlastingly in motion, throbbing, palpi-
tating, oscillating so far as the interstices of void
allow. The narrower the interstices and the shorter
the path which the atom describes, since its velocity
is uniform, the more often must it retrace it. In the
case of composite bodies, the motion of translation
is evident to the senses. When a cannon ball is shot
into the air every one of its atoms executes the
trajectory motion. But when it has fallen to the
ground its atoms are still moving with uniform
velocity, throbbing and oscillating as before over the
tiny interstices of void within the cannon ball, but
then their motions are wholly internal, latent (motus
intestini, clandestini). Nor can we suppose that
these internal motions cease during its flight through
the air. Here a simile may help us. A swarm of
bees moves from tree to tree. Seen from a distance,
their motion is a simple one, a motion of translation,
immeasurably slower but still of the same nature as
the flight of a cannon ball. A nearer view discloses
each separate bee executing motions in all manner
of directions, upward, downward, to right, to left,
backward, forward. This it continues to do during
the flight precisely as it had done when the swarm
as a whole was at rest, but in such a way that each
bee in the entire swarm makes the transit from the
one tree to the other. The direction of the motion
is altered, not the motion itself. As the flight of the
single bee in the swarm to the flight of the whole
swarm, so is the invisible motion of a single atom in
a composite body to the visible motion of the whole
body.
Or take the example of Lucretius, the particles
of dust seen in a sunbeam through a hole in a
shutter. "Observe whenever the rays are let in and
THE ATOMIC THEORY 227
pour the sunlight through the dark chambers of
houses: you will see many minute bodies in many
ways through the apparent void mingle in the midst
of the light of the rays, and as in never-ending con-
flict skirmish and give battle, combating in troops
and never halting, driven about in frequent meetings
and partings; so that you may guess from this what
it is for first beginnings of things to be ever tossing
about in the great void. So far as it goes, a small
thing may give an illustration ofgreat things and put
you on the track of knowledge. And for this rea-
son, too, it is meet that you should give greater heed
to those bodies which are seen to tumble about in
the sun's rays, because such tumblings imply that
motions also of matter latent and unseen are at the
bottom. For you will observe many things there
impelled by unseen blows to change their course, and
driven back to return the way they came, now this
way, now that way, in all directions round. All, you
are to know, derive this restlessness from the first
beginnings,"
*
/". efj the atoms. "For the atoms move
first of themselves; next, those bodies which form a
small aggregate and come nearest, so to say, to the
powers of the atoms, are impelled and set in move-
ment by the unseen strokes of those atoms, and they,
next In turn, stir up bodies which are a little larger.
Thus motion mounts up from the atoms, and step
by step issues forth to our senses, so that those bodies
also move, which we can discern in the sunlight,
though it is not clearly seen by what blows they so
act."
2
So complicated, then, is the process by which
the motion of single, free atoms ascends by various
shifting stages, hard to discriminate, and gives rise
to the morion of atoms in groups, larger or smaller,
'ii, 114 sgq,
a
n, 133^-
228 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
more or less closely associated, from mobile air to the
toughest flint or steeL
After thus dealing with the motion of the atoms,
Epicurus in the letter to Herodotus next passes
abruptly to the infinite worlds whose formation is
due to this motion. "There is an infinite number
ofworlds, some like this world, others unlike it. For
the atoms, being infinite in number, as has just been
proved, are borne ever further in their course. For
the atoms out of which a world might arise or by
which a world might be formed have not all been
expended upon one world or a finite number of
worlds, whether like or unlike this one. Hence
there will be nothing tohinder an infinity ofworlds."
1
What he means by a "world" he explains else-
where. "A world is a circumscribed portion of the
universe which contains stars and earth and all other
visible things."
2
He adds that it is cut off from the
infinite and the circumscribing limit in which it ends,
its outside boundary, may revolve or be at rest, and
may be rounded, triangular, or of any other shape.
In our world, so Epicurus thinks, the central earth
plays the most important part, being vastly greater
in size and mass than the sun and stars which sur-
round it. This fundamental error arose from his re-
fusal to treat astronomy as a serious or exact science,
to which reference has already been made. The
result is curious. If we neglect the miniature sun
and flickering stars which the eye of sense perceives
surrounding the earth in this our world, the bound-
less universe which Epicurus descries with his mental
vision approximates to a far greater degree than we
might at first sight suppose to the universe as it is
1
45, Epicurea, 9, 4 sqq.
9 Letter to Pythocles, Epicurea, p. 37, 7.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 229
conceived by the modern astronomer. To the latter
the universe is resolved into countless suns, each with
its attendant planetary system, and the nebulae out
of which such solar systems are believed to have de-
veloped. For him the many suns and planetary sys-
tems are dotted here and there throughout space, as
were the "worlds" of Epicurus. And yet of the
"solar"
*
as distinct from the "sidereal" system
the account given by Epicurus is flagrantly inade-
quate, and even puerile, not merelywhen judged from
a modern stand-point, but even when compared with
the current notions of the astronomers of his day.
The next division of the subject is concerned with
the manner in which we are affected by external ob-
jects, and we begin with a remarkable hypothesis,
that from the exterior surfaces of all composite bodies
there is a perpetual emission of particles ofmatter or
what we may call "films." "There are outlines, or
films which are ofthe same shape as the solid bodies,
but their fineness far exceeds that of any objects that
we see. For it is not impossible that there should be
found in the surrounding air emanations of this kind,
materials adapted for expressing the hollowness and
smoothness of surfaces, and effluxes preserving the
same relative position and sequence which they had
in the solid objects. To these filmswe give the name
of 'images' or 'idols.'"
2
This doctrine of emission or efflux can be traced
back to Empedocles and Democritus. To the first
inquirers at the threshold of psychology the prob-
lem of sense-perception was mainly physiological or
rather frankly physical. The act of perception was
1
Or, if the expression be preferred, the "planetary" Astern: that
madeup of oursunand itsattendant planets.
2
46, Epicwrw, p. 9, 12 sqq.
230 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
assimilated to the commonest cases of action and
reaction between external things, as when a stone
strikes the water or a seal is impressed on wax.
Bodies so acting and reacting were observed to be in
contact, and this fitted the senses of touch and taste.
But colours, sounds, and smells are perceived at a
distance. The problem was : How is this action at a
distance to be explained ? Not much help could be
obtained from the very crude notion of attraction
expressed in the proverb "Like to like," although it
plays a large part both in the theory of knowledge
and the theory of vision set forth by Empedocles.
Both he and Democritus were driven to assume that,
as in the case of touch, there must somehow be con-
tact even to allow of like acting upon like. Under
the stress of such necessities of thought they took
refuge in the theory of emanations. Vision was the
sense chiefly studied. Moreover, there was the con-
crete fact that an image of the object seen may be
observed in the pupil of the eye. Certain other
experimental facts, the losses of substance caused by
evaporation and corrosion, the way in which even
hard stones imperceptibly crumble and wear away
beneath the tread, may have contributed, as well as
the evidence of that perpetual change in the physical
universe which so powerfully impressed Heraclitus.
By whatever steps it was reached, this astounding
assumption was made the basis of the Atomists'
theory, not only of perception, but also of thought.
For when once it is granted that emanations are
given offby objects, it is comparatively easy to make
the further assumption that some ofthese emanations
a.re too fine to act upon the sense-organs, but not too
fine to affect the equally material soul or mind. For
the term "film" which we have used might equally
THE ATOMIC THEORY 231
well be substituted "efflux," "husk," "filament,""
layer," oreven "membrane." WeknowthatDemoc-
ritus called them Deikela, a term which, like "idols,"
suggests likeness. The outside layer or film, as Epi-
curus is at pains to explain, may resemble the solid
body from which it has parted in the mutual relation
and inter-connection of its various parts, that is to
say, in the two dimensions which a surface has in
common with a solid. The all-important distinction
between them is in the third dimension of depth.
The film lacks depth. In stereoscopic slides this im-
pression of depth is successfully imitated, and Epi-
curus, probably following Democritus, supposes a
constant succession of films from the same object to
be the means by which the impression of solidity is,
in fact, conveyed to the eye.
It is obvious that the theory raises more difficulties
than it solves. What becomes of all the films?
Again, all solid bodies must be perpetually suffering
loss. How is this loss made good ? As to the last
point, eitherwe are referred to theenormous quantity
of free atoms everywhere travelling in the void, which
by their accession may be supposed to make these
losses good, or we are reminded that all composite
wholes are frail and perishable, and do as a fact, in
the course of time, suffer diminution before they are
finally dissolved. The modern reader hardly needs
to be reminded how utterly inadequate to its special
purpose this assumption was, and how enormous the
work that had to be done by the sciences ofanatomy,
physiology, and optics before the conditions under
which an object is seen could be understood. The
Greeks knew nothing of the retina or the refractive
properties of the crystalline lens, and had no idea of
the eye asan optical instrument, ofthe nature of light
232 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
or ofthe nerves. The knowledge we have, imperfect
as it is, on these subjects has been acquired after
painful efforts and strenuous researches carried on
for generations. Itwould have been impossible with-
out the microscope, and the continuance of those en-
deavours to systematise and extend knowledge for its
own sake, which Epicurus discouraged on principle.
Why should men busy themselves with minute inves-
tigationsof the structure of the eye and the laws ofre-
flection, so long as there were infinite atoms, enough
and to spare, to bring a specimen of every visible
object to the eye of every observer ? Besides, an
ingenious corollary provides an easy explanation of
erroneous perceptions, hallucinations, and dreams.
Not only may films from real objects become dis-
torted and blunted, but films from different objects,
or even casual atoms, may meet in the air, blend, and
enter the eye, causing die vision of objects which
never were on land or sea, both in our waking hours
and in dreams. Such aggregates or complexes of
atoms, taking on the delusive appearance of real
objects, were technically designated Systaseis.
Epicurus goes on: "So long as nothing comes in
the way to offer resistance, motion through the void
accomplishes any imaginable distance in an indefi-
nitely short time. For resistance encountered is the
equivalent of slowness, its absence the equivalent of
speed. Not that, ifwe consider the times perceptible
by reason alone, the moving body arrives atmore than
one place simultaneously (for this, too, is inconceiv-
able), nor that when in time perceptible to sense it
arrives from any pointyou please ofthe infinite, it will
not be starting from the point to which we conceive it
to have made its journey. For, if it stopped there on
its arrival, thiswould be equivalent to its meetingwith
THE ATOMIC THEORY 233
resistance, even if up to that pointwe allow the speed
of its journey to imply the absence of resistance."
!
The reader will note that Epicurus is talking about
films, and the enormous velocity with which they
must travel in order to reach us, as in his view they
appear to do, instantaneously. This, however, in no
way detracts from the importance of these almost
parenthetical remarks about motion; not the motion
of atoms, which is at all times uniform, but the mo-
tion of systems of atoms. What is here said applies
to all such systems, whether the union is loose and
easily broken, as is the case with an invisible film,
more close as with the air and other gases, closer still
as in water and other fluids, or comparatively perma-
nent and durable as in earth and the various com-
posite bodies which we call solid. In all cases alike
the system moves slowly if resistance is encountered,
either externally from the medium, air or water, or
internally and this is far more important from the
jostling, collision, and backward rebound of the
single atoms composing the system. Such internal
resistance tends to impede die system. So, also,
would the pause of rest, if the system reached a
point, stopped, and then went on. But this, he ex-
plains, the film does not do unless it encounters re-
sistance.
He continues: "This is an elementary fact which
in itself is worth bearing in mind. In the next place,
the exceeding fineness of the images is contradicted
by none of the facts under our observation. Hence,
also, their velocities are enormous, since they always
find a void passage to fit them. Besides, owing to
their infinitesimal fineness, they meet with no resist-
ance or very little, though many structures, even if
1
46, 47* * c-> 10, 3 m-
234 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
they be ofinfinitesimal fineness, do at once encounter
resistance/'
1
The sun's heat is the example given by Lucretius.
He says: "First of all we may very often observe
that things which are light and made up of minute
atoms are swift. Of this kind are the light of the
sun and its heat/' 2
But, swift as they are, both
light and heat are often obstructed. So Lucretius in
another passage: "But that heat which the sun
emits and that bright light pass not through empty
void; and therefore they are forced to travel more
slowly, until they cleave through the waves, so to
speak, of air. Nor do the several minute atoms of
heat pass on one by one, but closely entangled and
massed together; whereby at one and the same time
they are pulled back by one another and are impeded
from without, so that they are forced to travel more
slowly/'
3
Here resistance, both from without and
within, would seem to be very clearly indicated.
But to return to Epicurus. "The production of
the images is as quick as thought. For particles
are continually streaming off from the surface of
bodies, though no diminution of the bodies is per-
ceptible because other particles take their place.
And those given offfor a long time retain the position
and arrangement which their atoms had when they
formed part ofthe solid bodies, although occasionally
they are thrown into confusion. Sometimes such
films are formed very rapidly in the air, because
they need not have any solid content, and there are
other modes oftheir formation. For there is nothing
in all this which is contradicted by sensation, if we
look at the clear evidence of sense in order, in some
degree, to learn what vehicles will transfer to our-
1
47, /. <;., 10, 13 sqq. *IV, 183 sqq.
3
II, 150 sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 235
selves the mutual inter-connection of external ob-
jects."
1
"We must also consider that it is by the entrance
of something coming from external objects that we
see their shapes and think of them. For external
things would not have stamped on us their own na-
ture of colour and form through the medium of the
air which is between them and us, or by means of
rays of light or currents of any sort going from us
to them, so well as by the entrance into our eyes or
minds of certain films coming from the things."
2
Here two theories of vision are criticised. Democ-
ritus, though it was from him that Epicurus bor-
rowed his doctrine of films, appears to have combined
with it the view that the air is the medium by which
visual impressions reach the eye. Possibly Gomperz
is right in supposing that Democritus conceived the
films or husks themselves entering the eye to account
for vision of near objects only, and introduced air
as the medium for visual impressions of objects at a
greater distance. One remark of his has come down
to us to the effect that, if it were not for the interven-
ing air, we should clearly descry even minute objects
at a great distance, such as an ant crawling along
the sky. At any rate, he supposed, so we are told
by Theophrastus, that the air received impressions
from the objects ofsight and transferred them to our
organs of vision, such impressions being literally
stamped on the air, like the mark of a signet on wax.
It was owing to this transference that they were often
blurred and indistinct when they reached us.
The second theory rejected, that of Plato in the
Timceusj is commonly held to have originated with
Empedocles, who certainly compared the structure
1
48, Epi&trea, n, 48 s^g.
3
49* * ^ P- JI > 14-20-
236 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of the eye to a lantern. The gist of his comparison
is that as the fire within the lantern, screened from
the winds by transparent sides ofhorn, talc, or linen,
nevertheless "leaps forth and casts a gleam through
the surrounding darkness," so visual rays of the na-
ture of fire dart out or shine forth from the pupil of
the eye.
1
Plato's account of vision is more compli-
cated; it involves the co-operation of three "fires,"
(i) that which streams forth from the eye (the visual
current), (2) the fire of daylight in the air, and (3) the
fire which is the colour of the object seen. Vision
takes place when these three coalesce.2
Both Em-
pedocles and Plato held that like is known by like.
"We see fire," says the former, "by the fire that is
in us." 3
Epicurus sticks to the film as a simple and
sufficient expedient and will have no medium like
air. His films travel along interstices ofvoid through
the air, and he will not hear of rays emitted from the
eye to meet the films.
Our text continues: "These films or outlines are
of the same colour and shape as the external things
themselves, in spite of the difference in size; they
move with rapid motion and this again explains why
they present the appearance of the single continuous
object and retain, when they impinge upon the sense,
the mutual inter-connection which they had in the
object, such impact being due to the oscillation ofthe
atoms in the interior of the solid object from which
they come. And whatever presentation we derive by
direct contact, whether with the mind or with the
sense-organs, be it shape that is presented or proper-
ties, this shape as presented is the shape of the solid
thing, and it is produced by a frequent repetition of
1
Empedocles, Fragment 84, Diels.2 2
Plato, Tim&us, 45B-46A.
3
Empedocles, Fragment 109, Diels.2
THE ATOMIC THEORY 237
the image or by the trace of itself which it leaves
behind it."
l
In sensation an image strikes upon the sense-organ.
In every act of preconception or ofmemory an image
strikes the mind. A series of repeated images or the
traces which they leave behind them in us produce
a presentation of the shape or properties of the ex-
ternal object from which they came. And if the
presentation be obtained in this way by direct con-
tact, whetheron the senses or the mind, it corresponds
exactly in shape and properties with the external
object. Ifthese conditions are fulfilled, the shape as
presented to us in sensation and memory or in pre-
conception is the real shape of the object, the proper-
ties so presented are the very properties which the
external object has. Epicurus is here passing from
the subject of films in general to the veracity of the
reports of the senses. A theory of mediate percep-
tion must answer the question: How do I know that
what I receive through the medium is an exact copy
of the object ?
He continues: "Falsehood and error always de-
pend upon the intrusion ofopinion when a fact awaits
confirmation or the absence of contradiction,, which
fact is afterwards frequently not confirmed or even
contradicted. For the presentations which are re-
ceived, e. g.j in a picture, or arise in dreams, or from
any other form of apprehension by the mind or by
the other criteria of truth would never have re-
sembled what we call the real and true things, had it
not been for the impact upon us of certain actual
things of the kind. Error would not have occurred
if we had not experienced some other movement in
ourselves, conjoined with, but distinct from, the per-
1
49, 5> Epic^ea, p. n, 20 5^f.
238 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
ception of what is presented. And from this move-
ment, if it be not confirmed or be contradicted,
falsehood results; while, if it be confirmed or not
contradicted, truth results. And to this view we
must adhere if we are not to repudiate the criteria
founded on the clear evidence of sense, nor again to
throw all things into confusion by supporting false-
hood as if it were truth."
1
The foregoing account is now applied to hearing
and smelling. "Again, hearing takes place when
a current passes from the object, whether person or
thing, which emits voice or sound or noise, or pro-
duces the sensation of hearing in any way whatever.
This current is broken up into homogeneous particles
which at the same time preserve a certain mutual
connection and a distinctive unity extending to the
object which emitted them and thus cause the per-
ception of it or, if not, merely indicate the presence
of the external object. For without the transmission
from the object of a certain inter-connection of the
parts, no such sensation would have arisen. There-
fore we must not suppose that the air itself is moulded
into shape by the voice emitted or by similar sounds;
for it is very far from being the case that the air is
acted upon in this way. The blow which is struck
in us when we utter a sound causes such a displace-
ment of the particles as serves to produce a current
resembling breath,
2 and this displacement gives rise
1
5: 52, /. c. t p. 12, 10 sqq.
2The Greek word Pneuma means both breath and wind. Here the
current or stream of voice-atoms is most probably compared to breath
itself issuing from the lips. It is, however, just possible that it is com-
pared to wind, for the sameword Pneuma, when it denotes a constituent
of that mixed substance, the soul, is translated by Lucretius ventus, and
must therefore denote wind, especially as air, strangely distinguished
from wind, is another constituent of the soul.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 239
to the sensation of hearing. Again, we must believe
that the sense of smelling, like that of hearing, would
produce no sensation were there not particles con-
veyed from the object which are of the proper size
for exciting the organ of smelling, some of one sort,
some of another, some exciting it confusedly and
strangely, others quietly and agreeably/'
i
The ordinary view made air the medium by which
sound, conceived as a shock or blow ofone thing upon
another, was conveyed to the ear. Thus Empedocles
held that particles of air were given offby the sonant
body. Hearing, according to him, is caused by the
impact of the air-wave against the cartilage or bony
flesh which is suspended within the ear, oscillating
as it is struck like a gong. As the organ of vision
contains a lantern, so the organ of hearing contains
a bell or gong, which the sound from without causes
to ring. But the Atomists, towhom the airwas not,
as it was to Empedocles, a form of primary matter,
but simply one of the composite bodies, were de-
barred from regarding the emanation from the
sonant body as consisting of air. What is given off,
z. <?., sound, considered as a physical thing, is a
stream of atoms. At the same time Democritus
would not altogether abandon the common belief
that air is the medium by which we hear. His view,
then, is a kind of compromise. The emanation, z. <?.,
the stream of atoms, from the resonant body sets in
motion the air which lies before it. In this stream
ofatoms from the body and in the air which is moved
by it like atoms come together according to the
similarity of their shapes and sizes. The sensation
ofhearing occurs when the atoms of air, rolled along
by and with the atoms of vocal sound, reach the
1
52, 53> * c~> P- *3> 10 *
240 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
orifice of the ear. It will be seen that Epicurus is
resolved to be perfectly consistent and excludes the
agency of the air altogether, either as medium or
emanation. The medium is the void, the particles
ofsound conveyed are atoms of that which is sonant.
On this view we hear exactly as we smell, except that
atoms of sound enter the ear, atoms of scent the
nostril.
Atoms, then, streams of atoms emitted from the
surface of composite bodies, are the causes of our
perceptions ofexternal things. The things perceived
have colour, sound, and odour. Is this so with the
atoms? Epicurus proceeds: "We must hold that
the atoms possess none of the qualities belonging to
things which come under our observation except
shape, weight, and size, and the properties necessarily
conjoined with shape. For every quality changes,
but the atoms do not change, since, when the com-
posite bodies are dissolved, there must needs be a
permanent something, solid and indissoluble, left
behind, which makes changes possible: not changes
into the non-existent nor out of the non-existent,
but through differences of arrangement and some-
times through additions and subtractions of the
atoms. Hence these somethings capable of being
differently arranged must be indestructible, exempt
from change, but possessed each of its own distinc-
tive mass and configuration. This must be assumed.
For in the case ofchanges ofconfiguration within our
experience, the figure is supposed to be inherent
when other qualities are stripped off, but the quali-
ties are not supposed, like the shape, which is left
behind, to inhere in the subject of change, but to
vanish altogether from the whole body. Thus, then,
what is left behind is sufficient to account for the
THE ATOMIC THEORY 241
differences in composite bodies, since something
must necessarily be left instead of everything being
annihilated."
l
The atom is unchangeable ex hypothesi, and this
may be secured provided that the qualities which the
atom possesses are themselves unchangeable. So
long as the shape remains unaltered through all the
morions, collisions, and entanglements which befall
the atom, since there is no void within it, there will
be no alteration in size and, since weight depends
upon size or mass, there will be no alteration in
weight. In this way size and weight may be re-
garded as properties necessarily conjoined with shape.
Neither of them would be affected by different ar-
rangement or position of the atoms, on which ulti-
mately depend the qualities which composite bodies
have and atoms have not. Take colour. In a
composite body or aggregate of atoms differently
placed and arranged and, it may be, themselves
different in shape and size, the colour which we per-
ceive as belonging to this aggregate, and which by the
canon of Epicurus really does belong to it, is a con-
sequence of these same atomic positions, arrange-
ments, shapes, and motions, and a change in them
may change the colour ofthe thing or composite body
without that thing necessarily ceasing to be what it
was. The questionmay be asked : To which division
of qualities does colour belong ? Is it a property, a
coniunctum? Or is it an accident, an eventum? It
seems safest to reply that generic colour, colour of
some sort or other, is a property of all visible things,
so long as they are visible; b\it particular colour is
an accident or eventum of a particular visible thing,
which often changes like the hues of a sunset cloud
1
54, 55> I- *> P- 14, 14 m-
242 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
or in a peacock's tail, owing to the difference ofatomic
motions produced by light or some other external
influence; lastly, that when a body ceases to be
visible it has no colour. The qualities which are
not inherent are accidental qualities, eventa, such as
whiteness, triangularity, which a thing may gain or
lose without ceasing to be what it is. Figure or shape
in general, however, is not such an eventum, but an
essential property, or coniunctum, of all material
things whether visible or not. We regard shape as
something which a material thing must have as long
as it exists at all. We recognise that the shape
changes, but we still think of the thing as being the
same under an altered shape, as in the growth of
animals and plants or when the same block ofwax
is moulded into different shapes. In other words,
so long as a material thing persists it must have some
shape or other.
Again, "we should not suppose that the atoms
have any and every size lest we be contradicted by
facts; but alternations of size must be admitted, for
this addition renders the facts of feeling and sensa-
tion easier of explanation. But to attribute any and
every magnitude to the atoms does not help to ex-
plain the difference of quality in things; moreover,
in that case atoms large enough to be seen ought to
have reached us, which is never observed to occur;
nor can we conceive how its occurrence should be
possible/*
1
This is another correction of Demo-
critus, who imposed no limitations on the size of
atoms, arguing that,, for all we know, they might be
as large as you please somewhere in an infinite uni-
verse. "We must not suppose that there is an in-
finity of particles in any finite body. Hence, not
'BSS* SM- -, P. 15, ^sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 243
only must we reject as Impossible subdivision ad in-
finitum into smaller and smaller parts, lest nothing
be left strong enough to form new aggregates and the
things that exist be necessarily pulverised and anni-
hilated, but in dealing with finite things we must also
reject as impossible the progression ad infinitum by
less and less increments."
l
The notion of such a progression is theg round-
work of the famous puzzle of Achilles and the tor-
toise, propounded by the EleaticZeno, Achilles,who
runs ten times as fast as the tortoise, gives the latter
a start ofa metre. When Achilles has run one metre
the tortoise is one decimetre in advance; when
Achilles has got as far as this he finds the tortoise a
millimetre in advance, and soon ad infinitum;whence
Zeno wished it to be inferred that Achilles will never
overtake the tortoise. Epicurus simply denies the
possibility of continuing ad infimtum such a pro-
gression, formed by a series of increments, each term
in the series being a definite fraction of the preceding
term, precisely as he denies the possibility of continu-
ing ad infinitum the process of subdivision of a finite
body, e. ., by taking half, then the halfofthis half, or
one-quarter, next the half of this quarter, or one-
eighth, and so on. The latter series of fractional
divisions is the complement of the former, that of
fractional increments. The impossibility in the one
case and in the other is bound up with Epicurus's
assumption that in the last resort not only body,
i. e^ matter, but the dimensions of body, which are
conceived as traversed in motion, are discrete. To
the atom, the indivisible minimum of body, corre-
sponds an indivisibleminimum ofa dimension, ofspa-
tial dimensions, length, breadth, and depth, at any
1
56, /. &, p. 16, 1-8.
244 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
rate when the space is filled and occupied with
body, under which conditions alone we have the clear
evidence of sense and intellect for progression from
point to point upon it. "For, when once we have
said that an infinite number of particles, ofwhatever
size, are contained in anything, it is not possible to
conceive how this should be. How, in the first place,
could the magnitude which they form be any longer
finite ? For clearly our infinite number of particles
must have some definite size, and then, of whatever
size they were, the aggregate they made would be
infinite. And in the next place, since what is finite
has an extremity which is distinguishable, even if it is
not by itself observable, it is not possible to avoid
thinking of another such extremity next to this.
Nor can we help thinking that in this way, by pro-
ceeding forward from one to the next in order,
by such a progression we can arrive in thought
at infinity/'
l
Atoms of any and every size are here disproved on
other grounds than the foregoing. The polemical
reference is to Anaxagoras, who maintained an in-
finite number of infinitesimal "seeds/* in his own
words, "infinite, both in number and in smallness,
for the small, too, was infinite/' 2
Moreover, they
are all present, Anaxagoras held, in every finite thing.
The possibility of a minimum he denied, being on
this point at issue with Leucippus and Democri-
tus, the Atomist predecessors of Epicurus. Let us
give the very words of Anaxagoras
: "Nor is there a
least ofwhat is small, but there is always a smaller;
for it is impossible that what is should cease to be by
being divided/' 3
And, since the portions ofthe great
1
57 I* c*> p- 16, 8 sqq.
a
Fragment i, Diels2
,
3
#.,3, Diels,2
THE ATOMIC THEORY 245
and of the small are equal in amount, for this reason
too, all things will be in everything. Nor is it possible
for them to be apart, but all things have a portionof everything. And in all things many things are
contained and an equal number both in the greater
and in the smaller of the things that have separate
existence."
1
Epicurus takes the doctrine to imply that the
number of atoms in each thing is infinite, and he
objects that, however small in size the individual
atoms, an infinite number of them could produce a
body not finite but infinite. His second objection is
that, if the atoms be of finite size and an infinite
number of them be contained in a single thing, the
progression from the extremity of the first to the
extremity of the next, and so on to that of the last
would be a never-ending progress, which he has
before declared to be impossible. The word trans-
lated here "extremity" and in Lucretius "cacurnen"
will best be understood if we take an angular point
or projection or extreme edge on any sensible body of
finite size, e. g*y the "point" of a sharpened lead-
pencil or the corner of a cube. If each atom has a
certain shape it must be conceived on the analogy of
finite bodies to project some part of this shape which
the mental vision can distinguish. But what, it may
be asked, of spherical atoms ? As it is impossible to
see the whole of a finite sphere with the bodily eye
or to present to the eye of the mind the whole of a
spherical atom at once, the part which we do see
will be bounded. The outside or edge in the part
we do see is in this case the extremity projecting into
view. This applies to the visualised pictorial image
as well as to actual perception.
1
Fragment 6, Diels?.
246 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Before we go further into the thorny subject of
discrete minima of area or surface, of length and
other dimensions, whether of body or space, the
modern student of philosophy will do well to remem-
ber where he stands at present. He is familiar with
two doctrines of space,
1
the Kantian and Berkeleian.
The former is not free from contradictions; it in-
volves the idea of infinite divisibility in the space-
world ofour experience. The Berkeleian denies this
infinite divisibility. We experience only an aggre-
gate of minima divisililia; no line is infinitely divis-
ible. Zeno's problem of motion from one point to
another, the moving body having to pass through
an infinite number of points in the interval, does not
exist for Berkeley any more than for Epicurus; the
movement is through a discrete number of units of
length. But Berkeley allowed for all manner ofsub-
stituting in our construction of the world. One ex-
perience can stand for and symbolise another. Hence
by substituting for the least part of the line perceived
or minimum divisibile, its magnified representation
as seen under a microscope, we treat that as the same
line, and this we can divide, and this process can be
repeated in thought indefinitely. The mathema-
tician generalises our experience and gives us a con-
ceptualised mathematical space which is infinitely
divisible and without limits in extent. Berkeley's
procedure furnishes an illustration and a clue to that
of Epicurus. Over and over again we find the latter
stating that the mental vision must be substituted for
actual perception with the eye; that where direct ob-
servation is impossible we must visualise in thought.
His conclusions, as we shall see, are very similar to
1
Cf. G. S. Fullerton, A System of Metaphysics, cc. X-XII, where the
two doctrines are expounded and compared.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 247
Berkeley's, but we must not overlook one great
difference between them. Berkeley's doctrine is
phenomenological, that of Epicurus is ontological.
For him the discrete minima have absolute ex-
istence.
Epicurus continues: "We must consider the mini-
mum perceptible by sense as not corresponding to the
extended which is capable of being traversed, nor
again as utterly unlike it, but as having something in
common with the extended things capable of being
traversed, though it is without distinction of parts.
But when, from the resemblance of what they have
in common, we think we shall distinguish something
in the minimum, one part on one side and another
part on the other side, another minimum equal to the
first must catch our eye. In fact, we see these
minima one after the other, beginning with the first,
and not as occupying the same space; nor do we see
them touch each other with their parts, but we see
that they afford a means of measuring magnitudes
by force of their individuality: there are more of
them if the magnitude measured is greater, fewer of
them if the magnitude measured is less."
1
The
magnitude measured by visible minima would natu-
rally be area or surface. It appears, then, that
Epicurus conceives a finite surface as reducible in
the last resort to an assemblage of discretes which
he terms sensible minima, and declares to be units
of measurement. Now compare the mathematical
conception of a finite surface. The geometer's sur-
face contains an infinite number of lines, each line
continuous but infinitely divisible, each division of a
line being a point. Epicurus, on the contrary, holds
that the finite area or surface consists of a finite
p. 17, i-n.
248 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
number ofdiscontinuous units of area, minima which
are discontinuous and discrete.
Hitherto we have been dealing with sensible things,
with sensible minima, whether of surface or mass.
Thus in the diagram the smaller square may be re-
garded as presenting four minima, the larger square
nine.
Epicurus now proceeds to apply his conclusions to
the atom. "We must think that the minimum in
the atom behaves conformably to this analogy. It is
only in minuteness that it differs from the minimum
seen by sense, but it follows the same analogy. We
have already declared on the analogy ofthings within
our experience that the atom has magnitude, and
herein we have merely reproduced something small
on a larger scale. And, further, the least and sim-
plest oflengths must be regarded as boundary-points,
furnishing from themselves as units the means of
measuring lengths, whether greater or less, the mental
vision being employed, since direct observation is
impossible. For the community which subsists be-
tween them," i. <?., boundary-points of length, "and
the things without extension or incapable of being
traversed," /. ., the minimal parts ofarea or surface,
"is sufficient to justify the conclusion so far as this
goes."
l
That is, as the visible minima measure area
or surface, so the boundary-points or discrete minima
oflength measure lengths. This passage clearlyshows
that Epicurus regarded a line or length as made up
"58, /. c., p. 17, II sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 249
of certain minima of length, his substitute for the
geometrical point. Geometers denied that a line
could be conceived as made up of, or could be
resolved into, a series of points. But in their con-
ception and definition of a point they differed widely
from Epicurus. The geometers assumed infinite di-
visibility; there was a point wherever the line could
be divided. Epicurus introduces us to discrete min-
ima of length which bound finite perceptible lengths
precisely as the geometer's points bound his lines.
The validity of the geometrical point had been al-
ready questioned by others; even Plato, it is said,
proposed to substitute the expressions "beginning of
a line" or "indivisible line" for point.
1
This by the way. Epicurus now returns to the
minima ofthe atom. "But it is not possible that these
minima ofthe atom should group themselves together
through the possession of motion" 2
; in other words,
these minima cannot first exist apart and then, in
virtue of possessing the attribute of motion, unite
together to form the atom. Our pressing business
now is with the atom conceived on the analogy of
finite bodies as occupying space and therefore ex-
tended, and, being extended (or, as Epicurus prefers
to say, "capable of being traversed"), as having
parts. We must not by one whit modify the con-
ception of the atom as indestructible, immutable,
impenetrable matter. It has parts, but it has no
interstices of void; therefore no destroying agency
can get between these parts and sever them. Hence
we must recognise that, thpugh the conception of
atoms accounts for all composite bodies, analysis is
not exhausted when these composite bodies have
i Aristotle, Metapkysica, A, 9, 992, a, 19-23.
*
59, p. 18, i, 2.
250 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
been reduced to atoms. There is a minimum smaller
than the atom, but no such minimum separately
exists. The atom is the least thing which can exist
"in solid singleness," the limit ofseparate, individual
existence. It would therefore be an error to suppose
that minima of the atom exist at first apart and then
combine to form atoms as atoms combine to form
composite things. The minima of the atom are in-
separable from each other and from the atom to all
eternity.
In the following passage Lucretius reproduces
his master's doctrine on this point: "Then again,
since there is ever an extremity, a bounding point
[to bodies which appear to us to be a least, there
ought in the same way to be a bounding point the
least conceivable]
1
to that atom which already is
beyond what our senses can perceive: that point
sure enough is without parts and consists of a least
nature and never has existed apart by itself, and will
not be able in future so to exist, since it is in itself
part of that other; and so a first and single part and
then other and other similar parts in succession fill
up in close serried mass the nature of the atom; and
since these cannot exist by themselves, they must
cleave to that from which they cannot in any way
be torn. Atoms, therefore, are of solid singleness,
massed together and cohering closely by means of
least parts, not compounded out of a union of those
parts, but rather strong in everlasting singleness.
From them nature allows nothing to be torn, nothing
further to be worn away, reserving them as seeds for
v
*A couple of lines must have dropped out between 599 and 600 of
our present text of Lucretius. Munro nib the gap with the words en-
closed in square brackets, and thus renders the argument and general
sense perfectly clear.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 251
things. Again, unless there shall be a least, the very
smallest bodies will consist ofinfinite parts, inasmuch
as the half of the half will always have a half and
nothing will set bounds to the division. Therefore,
between the sum of things and the least of things,
what difference will there be? There will be no
distinction at all; for how absolutely infinite soever
the whole sum is, yet the things which are smallest
will equally consist of infinite parts. Now, since on
this head true reason protests and denies that the
mind can believe it, you must yield and admit that
there exist such things as are possessed of no parts
and are of a least nature. And since these exist,
those atoms also you must admit to be solid and
everlasting."
*
Ifyou reject infinite subdivision you
must admit the existence of minima (though not
necessarily their separate existence). "Once more, if
Nature, creatress ofthings,had been wont to compel
all things to be broken up into least parts, then, too,
she would be unable to reproduce anything out of
those parts, because those things which are enriched
with no parts cannot have the properties which be-
getting matter ought to have I mean the various
entanglements, weights, blows, clashings, morions
by means of which things severally go on." 2 In
other words, why, it may be objected, should we stop
short at atoms ? Why should not the minimum re-
place the atom as the ultimate unit? The answer
is that, because the minimum is supposed to have no
parts, it is impossible to conceive it to behave as the
atom does. It cannot become entangled, collide,
fall, or move in the sameway as does the atomwhich
is possessed of parts.
Hitherto the incessant motion of atoms has been
1
1, 599 $<&.
* *
I, <
252 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
postulated and two of its species, (i) vibration or
oscillation of the imprisoned atom and (2) rebound
to a greater distance of the unimprisoned atom, have
been mentioned, both species implying previous col-
lision. There is another kind of atomic motion.
Atoms have weight and, like all heavy bodies per-
ceived by sense, tend to fall downward, /. e. y to move
in a certain empirically determined direction. In
the summary of Epicurean doctrine which we have
chosen as our principal authority this downward
tendency of the atom is not explicitly stated, though
a passage with which we shall shortly deal clearly
distinguishes motion due to weight from motion due
to collision, and the paragraph next to be cited is
unintelligible, except on the assumption that Epi-
curus held the doctrine in question. As a necessary
introduction we will cite the account given by
Lucretius: "Since they travel about through void,
the atoms must all move on either by their own
weight or haply by the stroke of another. For when
during motion they have, as often happens, met and
clashed, the result is a sudden rebounding in an
opposite direction; and no wonder, since they are
most hard and of weight proportioned to their
solidity and nothing behind gets in their way."
1
All atomsand all bodies compounded ofatomshave a
downward tendency. But, as this direction is liable
to alteration in consequence ofcollision,we must add,
"unless some force acting upon them, some blow,
compel them to move laterally or even vertically
upward/
1
As sense-perception is the foundation of
knowledge, especial care is needed here, for fire and
vapour are seen to rise, not fall. As Lucretius says
:
"Now methinks is the place herein to prove this point
*
11,83533.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 253
also that no bodily thing can by its own power be
borne upward and travel upward; that the bodies
of flames may not in this matter lead you into error.
For they are begotten with an upward tendency and
in the same direction receive increase; and goodly
crops and trees grow upward, though their weights,
so far as in them is, all tend downward. And when
fires leap to the roofs of houses and with swift flame
lick up rafters and beams, we are not to suppose
that they do so spontaneously without a force pushing
them up. See you not, too,withwhat force the liquid
ofwater spits out logs and beams ? The more deeply
we have pushed them sheer down and have pressed
them in, many of us together with all our might and
much painful effort, with the greater avidity it vomits
them up and casts them forth so that they rise and
start out more than half their length. And yet me-
thinks we doubt not that these, so far as in diem is,
are all borne downward through the empty void. In
the same way flames also ought to be able, when
squeezed out, to mount upward through the air, al-
though their weights, so far as in them is, strive to
draw them down."
1
Meteors, lightnings, the sun's
light and heat are also adduced to illustrate the
universal tendency of bodies to fall.
To return to Epicurus: "In that which is infinite
we must not say that there is an up and down in the
sense of an uppermost or a nethermost point. Still,
a line may be drawn vertically upward and stretch
to infinity from the point, wherever it is, where we
stand, and we must not say that this distinction ofup
and down will never befound in it. Nor, again, must
we say that, in respect ofany point we think of, that
which is beneath it and extends to infinity is at once
*
II, 184 sqq.
254 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
above and beneath as regards that same point. For
this is inconceivable. Hence we can assume one
motion in an upward direction, and only one, which
we extend in thought to infinity, and one motion in
a downward direction, and only one, even if ten
thousand times over it happens that that which
moves to the regions above our heads encounters the
feet of those above us, or that which moves down-
ward from us encounters the heads of those beneath
us. For the motion in the two cases is conceived as
extending to infinity in opposite directions through-
out/'
The author is attempting to meet the objection
that in infinite space there is no up and down, which
he grants, if up and down are used in an absolute
sense as implying a highest and a lowest point in
infinite space. But he goes on to defend the use of
the terms in a relative sense, and to deny that the
same direction can be at once both up and down
in reference to the same point of space. If it be
granted that a line starting from a given point in a
given direction may be produced both ways to in-
finity, then, he contends, ifwe call motion along this
line in one direction up, we may also call motion
along this line in the opposite direction down. A
falling body which moves in the direction from our
head to our feet and straight on in the same direction
to infinity has for us a downward motion, and what-
ever moves in the contrary direction from our feet to
our heads and straight on in the same direction to
infinity has for us an upward motion. From the
infinity of worlds it may be inferred that there are
sojrie worlds vertically over our heads and others
beneath our feet; in the last sentence but one we
1
60, 1. c.t p. 18, 3-14,
THE ATOMIC THEORY 255
seem to find a reference to the inhabitants of such
worlds. A point on the vertical line may be "down"
from their stand-point, though it is "up" from ours,
or vice versa.
"When they are travelling through the void and
meet with no resistance, the atoms move with equal
velocity. Nor will heavy atoms travel more quickly
than small, light ones so long as they meet with no
obstruction, nor small atoms travel more quickly
than great ones so long as they find a passage suitable
for their size and provided they also do not meet with
any obstruction. Nor will their upward or lateral
motion, which is due to collisions, nor, again, their
downward motion, due to weight, increase or lessen
their velocity. As long as their motion lasts, whether
it be vertical or not, their velocity will be quick as
thought until they meet with some obstruction,
whether due to external collision or theirown weight,
which overcomes the force of a previous impact.
Moreover, ofthe atoms in composite bodies, one will
not travel faster than another, since ail have equal
velocity; and this whetherwe consider the motion of
the atoms in an aggregate in one direction during
sensible and continuous time or their motions in dif-
ferent directions in times so short as to be appre-
hended only by the reason. But they frequently
collide and are thrust back and forth before finally
the continuity of their motion is appreciable by sense.
For the assumption that beyond the range of direct
observation even the minute times conceivable by
reason will present continuity of motion is a gratu-
itous addition, which is not true in the case before us.
Ourcanon is thatdirectobservationbysenseand direct
apprehensionby themind are alone invariably true."
l
1
61, 62, I. c., p. 18, 15 s&
256 STOIC AND EPICUREAN-
The atomic theory of Democritus, for whom tlie
polemical allusions are intended, undergoes in this
passage considerable modifications. We have no
precise information what the earlier Atomists con-
ceived the original motion of atoms to be. There is
little or no ground for attributing to them the belief
ofEpicurus that every atom has inherent in it a down-
ward tendency which we may, ifwe like, call gravity.
Their cosmogony starts with a confused motion of
colliding atoms which by the force of impact move
vertically, laterally, and in all directions. At the
same time it appears from Aristotle's criticisms that
Democritus did really suppose that iftwo atoms, one
larger and heavier, the other smaller and lighter,
moved in the same direction, the former would over-
take the latter. Aristotle suggested that Democritus
had omitted to take into account the resistance of the
air, and that in perfectly empty space a large body
a,nd a small body would move with equal velocity.
The opinion of Aristotle is indorsed by Epicurus, so
firmly, indeed, that when he comes to the crux of his
whole system he has to adopt a novel expedient to
bring about collisions between atoms travelling with
uniform velocity in the same direction. But of this
more hereafter. In the present passage he simply
affirms the uniform velocity of all atoms under all
conditions and at all times, on the ground that they
move in empty space which offers no obstruction.
Such an affirmation bears an external resemblance to
the doctrine of the conservation of energy. But Epi-
curus seems unconscious of the many assumptions
which his statement involves. His atoms are abso-
lutely hard and therefore inelastic. According to
him the direction of motion changes after impact,
but there is no loss of energy, and friction is ignored.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 257
His own concern is first with Democritus,whom ap-
parently he charges with confounding morion in a
medium such as air with motion in a void, and next
with the interesting and different problem, to which
we have already referred, of the motions of atoms
in which looser or closer association form composite
bodies. Ifwe may expand the terse obscurity of the
summary, the point he makes seems to be this. In
motion of translation the whole composite body in
finite time passes from pointA to pointB in a straight
line. We are tempted, therefore, by the perversity of
over-hasty presuppositions, and all those tendencies
which we may call groundless opinion, inference, or
belief, to argue that, if this finite time be subdivided
into atoms oftime distinctly conceivable by the mind
but too short to be apprehended by sense, the uniform
motion oftranslation will be maintained through each
ofthem, not only for the composite moving body as a
whole, but for each of its component atoms. This
he brands as a mistake. We have clear and distinct
apprehensions by the mind which are trustworthy,
because in them the mind seizes and grasps objective
images. When we picture the actual course of a
single atom in a composite body moving with motion
of translation, we see clearly and distinctly that it
does not describe a free course, but is in perpetual
oscillation backward and forward on account of col-
lision with the other atoms associated with it in the
composite body, and we may suppose him to add
this is the gist of the argument, though nowhere ex-
pressed that in this perpetual oscillation backward
and forward each atom of the composite body moves
with uniform velocity "quick as thought," as if it
were moving singly and freely through space, al-
though the movement of translation of the whole
258 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
composite body, as attested by sense, is so immeasur-
ably slower than the motion of the atom.
Lucretius describes the motion of the unimpeded
atom as many times surpassing in velocity the sun's
light and heat, which, he remarks, travel not through
void but through intervening air. He corrects the
error as he conceives it of Democritus thus: "But if
haply any one believes that heavier bodies, as they
are carried more quickly sheer through space, can
fall from above on the lighter and so beget blows able
to produce begetting motions, he goes most widely
astray from true reason. For whenever bodies fall
through water and thin air they must quicken their
descents in proportion to their weights, because the
body ofwater and subtle nature of air cannot retard
everything in equal degree, butmore readily give way,
overpowered by the heavier; on the other hand,
empty void cannot offer resistance to anything in any
direction at any time, but must, as its nature craves,
continually give way; and for this reason all things/'
z. e.9 all atoms, "must bemoved and borne alongwith
equal velocity though ofunequal weights through the
unresisting void."
1
But motion due to weight and motion due to col-
lision are not, so Epicurus thinks, the whole account
of the matter. It is unfortunate that we have not his
own statement but are forced again to borrow from
Lucretius who is, however, well supported by inde-
pendent authorities. We must also remember that,
if Epicurus comes off badly, he is setting out on an
adventure which the more prudent Democritus de-
clined. The question why things should be as they
are does not concern an empiricist. It is enough for
him to find out how they are. Aristotle expressly
1
II, 225 sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 259
testifies that Leucippus and Democritus declined to
give any cause of motion. They said it was original,
eternal, and without beginning, since each movement
presupposes a preceding movement, and to seek for
the beginning of an endless process is absurd. Ac-
cording to them a vortex motion of atoms preceded
the very beginning of our world as it now exists.
But beyond this they do not go back. Epicurus
seems to have argued that vertical motion in the
determinate direction which we call downward is
prior to the motion resulting from collision, impact,
and pressure, though why this should be so it is hard
to see, and that atoms moving with equal velocity in
the same direction would never collide. Feeling
bound to offer some explanation, since both the
tendency to fall downward and the collision seemed
guaranteed by sense, he modified his premisses in an
arbitrary manner by the gratuitous assumption of an
atomic declination from the perpendicular to a mini-
mum extent. Sense tells us that heavy bodies fall
downward to the earth, but sense never can assure
us that they do not diverge from the perpendicular,
provided the divergence is too small for sense to
discern. Here, again, he avails himself of that con-
venient loose second clause of the canon with its
fatal flaw: "Nothing in our experience contradicts
such an assumption." Certainly not, when the as-
sumption is expressly removed from the region of
trustworthy observation. The all important evi-
dence of sense does not, because it cannot contradict
an imperceptible swerving. Over this assumption
opponents made merry, while apologists almost as
unkind would persuade us that our philosopher
actually introduced spontaneity into nature out of
sheer aversion for the natural necessityofDemocritus,
260 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
According to M. Guyau, the power of atoms to de-
cline from their path in whatever direction it is does
not disappear after they have combined in matter, but
still remains, endowing bodies with a power of spon-
taneous motion to a quite imperceptible degree.
M. Guyau holds that such a blind latent force of
spontaneity, working imperceptibly in the things
around us, issues in those events which are ascribed
to chance or accident. Instead of attributing atomic
declination to so unworthy a motive we should rather
regard it as a desperate device to which Epicurus
thought himself driven, if, in Plutarch's words, stars
and animals and chance and human action were to
be saved from destruction. Here the same three
causes can be distinguished as in the letter to Me-
noeceus. The atoms by natural necessity have
formed our world in which stars and animals are
included; some things again are due to chance,
while true spontaneity, as distinct from both of these,
is to be found in human action alone. Atomic
declination should be regarded, then, as coming
under the first rather than the second or third of
these heads. It is, Lucretius conceives, doubtless
following Epicurus, a necessary postulate for the
third, since the motions which are initiated by our
will are in the last analysis movements of soul atoms.
Epicurus was no determinist where human action is
concerned, because, as it seemed to him and has
seemed to many others since, the testimony of con-
sciousness contradicts the determinist position. The
problem, then, was how to reconcile free-will or spon-
taneous initiative with mechanical necessity in the
natural world. The solution which he tendered
must be judged on its merits. It is perhaps not
more successful than any other. But great as is the
THE ATOMIC THEORY 261
departure from the true doctrine ofmechanical neces-
sity which Democritus consistently maintained, this
is a very different thing from calling in spontaneity
as a principle in nature.
But it is time to let Lucretius expound his master's
doctrine in his own words: "When atoms are borne
downward sheer through void by their own weights
at quite uncertain times and uncertain spots they
push themselves a little from their course; you just
and only just can call it a change of inclination. If
they were not used to swerve they would all fall
down like drops of rain, through the deep void, and
no clashing would have been begotten nor blow pro-
duced among the atoms; thus nature never would
have produced aught/'
1
Here, then, we learn the truth. Go back as far as
we may in the history ofthe universe, there is no rain
of atoms downward. Epicurus, like Democritus,
supposed atoms moving in all directions, the inherent
force of pseudo-gravity with which Epicurus, in
obedience to experience, endowed his atoms, being
everywhere counteracted by the effects of collision.
The actual universe shows on a large scale what we
see of motes in a sunbeam, viz., a dance of particles
in all directions. The ceaseless rain of eternal atoms
racing through infinite space in the same downward
direction, the conception which called forth the en-
thusiasm of Fleeming Jenkin, belongs to an unreal
or imaginary universe in which free atoms never
collide because they never decline. Such a concep-
tion Epicurus relegated to the limbo of false opinion,
unreality, and error for the sufficient reason that<our
world, and infinite other worlds, actually exist, i. e.y
have come into being, which could never have hap-
1
II, 216 sqq*
262 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
pened on the hypothesis rejected. After refuting the
opinion attributed to Democritus, that heavier atoms
fall more quickly and overtake lighter ones, Lucretius
proceeds: "Therefore heavier things will never be
able to fall from above on lighter nor of themselves
to beget blows sufficient to produce the varied mo-
tions by which nature carries on things. Wherefore,
again and again I say bodies must swerve a little; and
yet not more than the least possible, lest we be found
to be imagining oblique motions, and this the reality
should refute. For this we see to be plain and evi-
dent that weights, so far as in them is, cannot travel
obliquely when they fall from above, at least sofar as
you can perceive; but that nothing swerves in any
case from the straight course, who is there that can
perceive I"
l
The qualifying clauses should be care-
fully noted.
Lucretius goes on to adduce the evidence of con-
sciousness for our own power of spontaneous initia-
tive. "Again, if all motion is ever linked together
and a new motion ever springs from another in a
fixed order and atoms do not by swerving make some
commencement of motion to break through the de-
crees of fate, that cause follow not cause from ever-
lasting, whence have all living creatures here on
earth, whence, I ask, has been wrested from the fates
the power by which we go forward whither the will
leads each, by which likewise we change the direction
ofour motions neither at a fixed time nor fixed place,
but when and where the mind itself has prompted ?
For beyond a doubt in these things his own will
makes for each a beginning and from this beginning
motions are welled
2
through the limbs. See you not,
too, when the barriers are thrown open at a given
1
II, 240 sqq.
zPer membra rigantur.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 263
moment, that yet the eager powers of the horses can-
not start forward so instantaneously as the mind
itself desires ? The whole store of matter through
the whole body must be sought out in order that,
stirred up through all the frame, it may follow with
undivided effort the bent of the mind, so that you
see the beginning of motion is born from the heart,
and the action first commences in the will of the
mind and next is transmitted through the whole bodyand frame. Quite different is the casewhenwe move
on propelled by a stroke inflicted by the strong mightand strong compulsion of another; for then it is
quite clear that all the matter of the whole bodymoves and is hurried on against our inclination until
the will has reined it in throughout the limbs. Do
you see, then, in this case that, though an outward
force often pushes men on and compels them fre-
quently to advance against their will, and to be
hurried headlong on, there yet is something in our
breast sufficient to struggle against and resist it?
And when, too, this something chooses, the store of
matter is compelled sometimes to change its course
through the limbs and frame, and after it has been
forced forward, is reined in and settles back into its
place. Wherefore in atoms, too, you must admit
the same, admit that besides blows and weights there
is another cause of motions, from which this power
of free action has been begotten in us, since we see
that nothing can come from nothing. For weight
forbids that all things be done by blows through, as
it were, an outward force; but that the mind itself
does not feel an internal necessity in all its actions,
and is not, as it were, overmastered and compelled
to bear and put up with this, is caused by a minute
swerving of atoms at no fixed part of space and no
264 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
fixed time."
l
The cogency of this reasoning depends
upon the Epicurean theory of the atomic constitution
of the soul.
Epicurus now treats of the soul. "Next, with
constant reference to our perceptions and feelings
(for so we shall have the surest grounds for belief),
we must understand generally that the soul isj&
c^poreajjibjbgf composed of fine partict^?ispersed
aHTovSr the frame, most nearly resembling wind with"
'an admixture of heat, in some respects like wind, in
others like Keat, but in part even superior to bpth^
of them in the fineness of its particles, and on that
account in closer sympathywith the rest ofthe frame.
And this is shown by all the mental faculties and
sensations, by the ease of mental motion ancTby
thoughts, Stid by that the loss ofwhich causes death.
And we must keep in mind that soul has the greatest
share in causing sensation. Still, it would not have
had sensation had it not been confined within the
rest of the frame. But the rest of the frame, though
it provides this indispensable condition for the soul,
and has itself, too, shared in a like property, yet does
not possess all the attributes of soul. Hence on the
departure of the soul it loses sensation."
2
This
means that atoms ofsoul can neither have sensation
themselves nor cause the body to have sensation
unless they are confined in the body. ^Vhen so con-
fined, they;mtonly have sensation, but communicate
it to the body? which becomes sentkpjt;. But other
properties ofthe soul, e. g,, the power to think, are not
in this way communicated to the body, confinement
in which is the indispensable condition that the soul
should have sensation and thought. "For the body
had not this power in itself, but something else when
1
II, 251 sqq.
3
63, 64, Epicurea, p. 19, 15 sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 265
conjoined thereto procured it for the body, which
other thing through the faculty brought to perfection
in it in virtue of morion at once acquired for itself a
quality of sentience, and in virtue of the neighbour-
hood and close sympathy between them, as I said,
imparted it to the body also. Hence, so long as the
soul is in the body, it never loses sentience through
the loss of some other part. The frame may be
loosened either .wholly,or inJjart
^
souPmay
-
to_survive^_
sent^euicir"""But tKe*TesTl)FT^
whole of it survives or only a part, will no longer
have sensation when once that has departed which,
however small in amount, attunes the multitudinous
atoms to harmony and life. Moreover, when the
whole frame is broken up the soul is scattered, and
has no longer the same powers as before, nor does it
move, and hence it does not possess sentience. For
we cannot conceive the sentient subject as otherwise
than in this composite whole and moving with these
movements; nor can we conceive it when the body
which encloses and surrounds it is not the same as
that in which the soul is now located and in which
it performs these movements. There is a further
point to observe; I mean, what the incorporeal is
when the term is applied to a thing in itself incor-
poreal.
It isJjnpossi^^ fefcjg
incorpo^ which can-
not itself either act or be acted upon, but simply
allows body to move through it. Hence those who
call soulJ^S2SMSS^^^^^^^' ^or iTTTTwere
^^^ upon<. But, as
it is, both these properties manifestly belong to
soul. Thus, then, if we refer all these arguments
266 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
concerning soul to the standard of our feelings and
perceptions, and if we remember the propositions
stated at the outset, we shall see that the subject has
been adequately comprehended in outline and thus
be able to verify with certainty the details."
*
This account is for the most part quite plain and
easy to follow. Special stress is laid onjthe mutual
relation and inter-connectiqn15eT;^^
body, 'such that neltH^r can^exist Ayidiout the other.
*
-,**,..1.L .
t
,
1.
",""'/ , .
'
^-''''^^f^^^^^^^^m^uWe also learn that soul is a corporeal thing, a very
fine substance, and a composite substance, wind and
heat being mentioned as two elements in the com-
pound. The words "the frame may be loosened
either wholly or in part and portions of the soul may
thereby be lost" most probably refer to the effects of
a deadly blow causing a swoon, so that for some time
life is apparently extinct though recovery is occasion-
ally possible even then. If this is so the following
parallel from Lucretius serves to interpret them:
"
Again, a blow more severe than its nature can
endure prostrates at once any living thing and goes
on to stun all the senses of body and mind. For the
positions of the atoms are broken up and the vital
motions entirely stopped until the matter, disordered
by the shock through the whole frame, unties from
the body the vital fastenings of the soul and scatters
it abroad, and forces it out through all the pores.
For what more can we suppose the infliction of a
blow can do than shake from their place and break
up the union of the several elements ? Often, too,
when the blow is inflicted with less violence the re-
maining vital motions are wont to prevail, ay, prevail
and still the huge disorders caused by the blow and
recall each part into its proper channels, and shake
1
64-68, /. c.t p. 20, 13 $qq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 267
off the motion of death now reigning, as it were,
paramount in the body and kindle afresh the almost
lost senses. For in what other way should the thing
be able to gather together its power ofmind and come
back to life from the very threshold of death, rather
than speed on to the goal to which it had almost run
and so pass away?"
l
In the third book of his poem Lucretius deals with
the soul and goes over much the same ground as
Epicurus, but with far greater fulness of detail, and
the additional statements he makes are confirmed by
casual references from other authorities, even where
they at first sight conflict with the bare summary
given by his master. His account of the nature and
composition of the soul starts with a refutation of the
doctrine ofharmony, so well known from its examina-
tion in Plato's Phcedo. Thi&.4octonermbdii.J^4wc!?s^
^ -a^^PAQJ^
to a m$r relatk>@aJaa^
the various parts of
(
the-bd^J^ad been revived by
"Sy^SW^us and Aristoxenus, pupils of Aristotle.
Lucretius passes on next to distinguish in the single
substance of the soul two parts which he calls Animus
and anima. The former he describes as the superior,^a*""*"*"*'
-i ^^**Y'*^or ruling part and as localised in me breast,me latter^
as diffusedjfijough the whole body. "Now I assert
thaftfie^ mind and the soul are kept together in close
union, and make up a single nature, but that the
directing principle which we call
sj^adi&
*s t^ie head> so
*
to sPea^>
mountm the^hokJbod^ It has^a
middle""region
,+
of,A&!IBSai^ KereTtlirob
appMiension, about these spots dwell soothing joys;
therefore here is the understanding or mind. All the
1
II, 944 $qq.
268 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
rest of the soul disseminated through the whole body
obeys and moves at the will and inclination of the
mind."
1
Again: "And since we perceive that^vital
sense is in the whole body, and we see that it is aTT
w
en3owe3 witfi life, if on a sudden any forc^^vpith
swift blow shall have cut it in twain so as quite to*
dissever the two halves, the power .p^jJ^jQul will
without doubt at the .same time^J^ cleft ancT cut
asuncler and dashed in twain.^o@^^^wi3i^3ie
body."
2
A soldier's arm or foot or head, he^gtes on
to say, cut off in the heat of battle will show for a
time remains of sense and motion, and a serpent
chopped in pieces may be seen to writhe and wriggle
on the ground. These facts, which the poet ad-
duces to prove diatlla&JSQij^^ therefore
ye equally well to prove
" ^
"sense and therefore the presence
exaggerated the distinction between the
two parts (l) animus or mens, and (2) anima by the
choice of his Latin terms for them. Our Greek
authorities speak of the former only as the ruling
part of the soul and the latter as soul in general. It
may be a consciousness of this exaggeration that
leads the poet subsequently to say that he will in
future ignore the difference between them and treat
the animus and the anima as one single substance.
3
There is, indeed, merely a difference of function be-
tween them, and this may be traced back to the fact
that in the breast soul atoms are closely huddled
together and thus give rise to atomic motions more
complicated than is the case when they are dispersed
through the limbs and the periphery of the body,
and are comparatively rare. These atoms are in
1
III, 136 sqq.
*
III, 634 sqqs
3
III, 421.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 269
all cases exceedingly minute, smooth, and spherical.
But in the composite substance which they unite to
form can be distinguished not only atoms ofwind and
ofheat, but also atoms of air and ofa fourth nameless
substance in which all sensation begins. In the sum-
mary given by Epicurus above, the third and fourth
classes of constituent atoms, the atoms of air and of
the nameless substance are passed over, but that he
recognised them is a well-attested fact. It causes
some surprise that any distinction at all should be
made between wind and air, especially when we
learn from Lucretius that "wind is produced when
the air has been stirred and set in motion."
l
But
air, according to Epicurus, is not, so to speak, a
simple body, but is composed ofatoms which, though
always fine and smooth, are yet of different kinds,
some ofthem fiery, some moist, togetherwith atoms of
various things which have been evaporated or pulver-
ised. In fact, the atmosphere is a medley of atoms of
all sorts of things, provided these things have been
volatilised. The poet tells us that "the air is changed
over its whole body every hour in countless ways.
For whatever ebbs from things is all borne away
always into the great sea of air; and unless it in
return were to give back bodies to things and to
recruit them as they ebb, all things ere now would
have been dissolved and changed into air,"
2 z. <?., they
would have entered into that medley of which the
atmosphere is constituted. It has been suggested
3
that the exact difference between air and wind is one
of temperature, and that in air there is a predomi-
nance of atoms such as constitute a medium or calm
temperature in the wind which blows a predominance
of atoms slightly larger and less smooth, such as
x
VI, 685.
*
V, 275 sqq.
3
Giussarxi, Stitdi bucreziani, p. i84<
270 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
constitute a cold temperature. As to the fourth sub-
stance which Lucretius calls the "soul of the soul/*
the idea of some scholars that it was confined to the
breast is preposterous and absurd, for, if sensation
starts with it, it must be present in every part of the
frame which has sensation and therefore it must be
a constituent of every part of the soul. Moreover,
the doxographers inform us that in the opinion of
Epicurus sensation took place in the various sense-
organs, the eye, the ear, the tongue, the nostrils and
was not, as some other schools held, localised in or
transferred to a central organ, heart or brain.
Lucretius thus describes the part which this fourth
nameless substance takes in the initiation and trans-
mission of sensation. "Thus some fourth nature, too,
must be added to these: it is altogether without
name; than it nothing exists more nimble or more
fine, or of smaller or smoother elements: it first
transmits the sense-giving motions through the frame;
for it is first stirred, made up as it is ofsmall particles;
next the heat and the unseen force of the wind re-
ceive the motions, then the air; then all things are set
in action, the blood is stirred, every part of the flesh
is filled with sensation; last of all the feeling is
transmitted to the bones and marrow, whether it be
one of pleasure or an opposite excitement.
1
Epicurus next explains the nature and mode of
existence which be ascribes to his two classes of
qualities, the permanent properties, coniuncta and
the variable accidents, eventa. "Shapes and colours,
magnitude and weights, and, in short, all those quali-
tieswhich are predicated ofbody are properties, either
of all bodies or of visible bodies, and can be known
as belonging to body by sense-perception. All these
1
HI, 241 sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 271
properties must not be supposed to exist indepen-
dently by themselves (for this is inconceivable), nor
again to be non-existent nor to be some other incor-
poreal essences present in body besides, nor yet to be
parts of body. We must consider a whole body in
general to derive its permanent nature from them,
though it is not, as it were, formed by grouping them
together in the same way as when from the particles
themselves a larger aggregate is made up, whether
these particles be primary," z. ., the least percep-
tible which have the property in question, "or any
parts whatsoever less than the particular whole. All
these qualities, I repeat, merely give to body its own
permanent nature. They all have their own char-
acteristic modes of being perceived along with the
whole body in which they inhere and never as sepa-
rated from it; and it is in virtue of this complex
conception ofbody that they have received the appel-
lation of properties."
l
"Again, qualities often attach to bodies without
being permanent concomitants. They are not to be
classed among invisible entities nor are they incor-
poreal. Hence, using the term "accidents" in its
commonest sense, we say plainly that "accidents"
have not the nature of the whole thing to which they
belong, and to which, conceiving it as a whole, we
give the name of body, nor that of the permanent
properties without which body cannot be thought of.
And in virtue of certain peculiar modes of cognition
into which the complex body always enters each of
them can be called an accident. But the object,
whatever it is, in which the accident is said to inhere,
does not derive its permanent nature from the acci-
dents which accompany it. There is no need to
8, 69, Epicurea, p. 22, 13 sqq.
272 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
banish from reality this clear evidence that the acci-
dent has not the nature of the whole to which it
belongs, nor of the permanent properties which ac-
company the whole. Nor must we suppose the
accident to have permanent existence (for this is as
inconceivable in the case of accidents as in that of the
permanent properties). They are what they appear
to be. They must all be regarded as accidents of
body, not as permanent concomitants nor as having
the rank ofindependent existence. They are seen to
be exactly as sensation itself makes known their in-
dividuality/'
*
The question what we mean when we say that an
attribute exists is bound up with another question,
what exactly is meant by saying that a thing has an
attribute or quality, the question of the import of
predication. On both points ancient and modern
thinkers have been much divided. In some of his
dialogues Plato implies that there are "ideas," as he
calls them, of qualities, that qualities like beauty are
self-existent realities or essences, and that a particular
thing is beautiful because it partakes in self-existent
beauty, which therefore is immanent in it. This
Platonic view is the first which Epicurus rejects.
Again, in disclaiming the absolute non-existence of
properties he probably refers to Democritus, who
asserted that colour, sound, and odour did not in
reality belong to the external objects which we per-
ceive as coloured, sonant, and odorous. The view
that qualities are "other incorporeal existences
present in body" is that of Aristotle, the view that
qualities are material parts of objects that of the
Stoics.
Now as to time. "There is another thing which
1
70, 71, I. c., p. 23, 13 sqq<
THE ATOMIC THEORY 273
we must consider carefully. We must not investi-
gate time as we do the other accidents which we
investigate in a subject, viz., by referring them to the
generic types present to our minds, but we must sim-
ply attend to the intuitive action itself in virtue of
which we speak of 'a long time' or *a short time"
in the common acceptation of the term. We need
not adopt any fresh terms as preferable, but should
employ the usual expressions about it. Nor need we
predicate anything else of time, as if this something
else contained the same essence as is contained in the
proper meaning ofthe word time (for this is also done
by some)."
l
Time had been defined as "number of
motion" or "measure ofmotion." Epicurus does not
think this makes the idea conveyed by the word time
any clearer. "We must chiefly attend to that to
which we attach this peculiar character of time and
whereby we measure it. No further proof is re-
quired; we have only to reflect that we attach time
to days and nights and their parts, and likewise to
feelings of pleasure and pain and to neutral states,
to states ofmovement and states of rest, and consider
that time itself is a peculiar accident of all these, and
so it is in virtue of this accident that we apply the
name 'time/ " 2
Unlike empty space, which has real and separate
existence, time, as above explained, is merely an
accident, and, further, that to which it attaches, that
of which it is an accident, is not anything real or
corporeal but is itself an accident. Time, then, is
an accident of accidents, an accident of events or
occurrences in the present, past, or future. This
point is brought out by Lucretius thus: "Time, also,
has no separate existence, and it is due simply to
1
72, J. ft, p- 24, 12 sqq.
a
72, 73> * ft, P- 25, 3-10.
274 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
events that happen that our mind grasps what has
taken place in the past, and also what is happening
now, and, further, what follows in the future. We
must admit that no one has a perception oftime in the
abstract, apart from the movement of events, whether
fast or slow. Further, when men say that events like
the rape of Helen and the conquest of the Trojan
people by the sword have existence, we must be care-
ful that they do not haply force us to admit that these
events have separate existence, on the ground that
the generations of men, ofwhom these were the ac-
cidents, have been carried away by time now gone
by without recall. For whatever may have taken
place may be called an accident, in one aspect, of the
Trojan people,
1
but in another aspect, of the country
itself. Further, if there had been no matter and no
place and room, in which the different processes go
on, never would the fire, kindled by love of Helen's
beauty, have blazed in the heart of Phrygian Paris,
and kindled that famous contest of cruel war; nor
would the wooden horse, unknown to the Trojans,
have set fire to Pergamus by the hand of the Greeks
who came forth from its womb in the night. Hence
you can clearly see that all events from first to last
have no separate existence or being as body has, and
are not terms ofthe same kind as void is; rather they
are such that you may justly call them accidents of
body and accidents of place in which the different
processes go on."
2
"Next," Epicurus goes on, "we must consider that
the worlds and every finite aggregate which bears a
strong resemblance to the things we see have arisen
out of the infinite. For all these, whether small or
great, have been separated offfrom special conglomer-
1
Reading Teucris with Munro for terris.
' 2
1, 459 sqg*.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 275
ations of atoms, and all things are again dissolved,
some faster, some slower, some through the action of
one set of causes, others through the action of an-
other. And we must not suppose that the worlds
have necessarily one and the same shape. For no-
body could prove that in one sort of world there
could equally well not be found as be found the seeds
out ofwhich animals and plants and all the rest ofthe
things we see arise, and that in another sort ofworld
this would have been impossible."
l
"Again, we must suppose that human nature, too,
has been taught and forced to learn many various
lessons by the facts themselves, and that reason sub-
sequently develops what it has thus received and
makes fresh discoveries, among some men more
quickly, among others more slowly. Hence, even
the names of things were not originally due to con-
vention, but in the several tribes under the impulse
of special feelings and special presentations of sense
primitive man uttered cries. The air thus emitted
was moulded by their individual feelings or sense-
presentations, and differently according to the differ-
ence in the regions which the tribes inhabited.
Subsequently whole tribes adopted their own special
names in order that their communications might be
less ambiguous to each other and more briefly ex-
pressed. Some men, we must suppose, who knew
about them, tried to introduce the notion of things
not visible, and put in circulation certain names for
them, which they were compelled to utter, while the
others, following their reason as best they could,
interpreted them in that sense/'
2
There is no plan in nature, says Epicurus, nothing
which can be referred to supernatural will or agency.
1
73, Epicure^ p. 25, n sqq.
*
75, 76, 1, c., p. 26, 7 sqq.
276 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
"We are bound to believe that in the heavens revolu-
tions, solstices, eclipses, risings, and settings and the
like take place without the intervention or command,
either now or in the future, of any being who at the
same time enjoys perfect bliss alongwith immortality.
For troubles and anxieties and feelings of anger and
favour do not accord with bliss, but always imply
weakness and fear and dependence upon one's neigh-
bours. Nor, again, must we hold that ignited globu-
lar masses of fire, endowed with bliss, produce these
motions at will. Nay, in every term we use we must
hold fast to all the majesty which attaches to such
notions as bliss and immortality lest the terms
should generate beliefs inconsistent with this majesty.
Otherwise such inconsistency will of itself suffice to
produce disturbance in our minds. Hence, where
we find phenomena invariably recurring, the invari-
ableness of the recurrence must be ascribed to the
original interception and conglomeration of atoms
cut off from the infinite, whereby the world was
formed."
l
This passage, to be fully appreciated, must be read
in the light of the antagonistic Stoical doctrine which
is so pointedly assailed. The stars, according to the
Stoics, were "globular masses of fire," and yet at the
same time were rational and supremely happy beings,
endowed with life as well as self-motion. Epicurus
first points out that the intelligent government of the
world is fatal to the immortality of bliss which is the
divine prerogative, and then tenders a different
explanation ofthe order and regularity ofphenomena.
The sun rises and sets regularly only because the
combination of atoms evolves that particular change
again and again with an approximation to uniformity.
1
7<5, 77, '- c-> P 7 17 W-
THE ATOMIC THEORY 277
"We must hold that to arrive at accurate knowl-
edge of the cause of the things ofmost moment is the
business of natural science and that happiness de-
pends upon this and upon knowingwhat the heavenly
bodies really are, and anything else which contributes
to exact knowledge in this respect. Further, we
must recognise no plurality of causes or contingency
in the things of most moment, but must hold that
nothing suggestive of conflict or disquiet is compat-
ible with an immortal and blessed nature. And the
intellect can grasp the absolute truth of this."
*
By
the "matters of greatest moment" Epicurus means
the exclusion of the gods or any supernatural agency
whatever from the government of the world. This
he considers fully established and absolutely certain.
No alternative hypotheses or contingencies are admis-
sible on this subject. This is all we know for certain
and all we need to know.
"But when we come to subjects for special in-
quiry there is nothing in the knowledge of risings and
settings and solstices and eclipses and all kindred
subjects that contributes to our happiness, but those
who are well-informed about such matters, and yet
are ignorant what the heavenly bodies really are, and
what are the most important causes of phenomena,
feel quite as much fear as those who have no such
special information; nay, perhaps even greater fear
when the curiosity excited by this additional knowl-
edge cannot find satisfaction nor subordinate these
phenomena to the highest causes. Hence, if we dis-
cover more than one cause to account for solstices,
settings and risings, eclipses and the like, as we did
also in particular matters of detail, we must not
suppose that our treatment of these matters fails
1
78, /. c., p. 28, 15 sg$.
278 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of accuracy so far as it is needful to insure our
tranquillity and happiness. When, therefore, we in-
vestigate the causes of celestial and meteorological
phenomena, as of all that is unknown, we must
take into account the variety of ways in which anal-
ogous occurrences happen within our experience;
while as for those who do not know the difference
between what is or comes about from a single cause
and what is the effect of many causes, who overlook
the different impression which things make upon us
when seen from a distance, and so are ignorant ofthe
sort of matters which leave our tranquillity unaf-
fected, all such men we must treat with contempt.
If, then, we believe that an event could happen in
one or other particular way out of several which
leave our tranquillity unaffected, we shall be as tran-
quil when we are aware that it actually does come
about in more ways than one as we should be if
we knew that it happens in only one particular
way/'
x
The argument is this: When the same effect is
known to have more than one cause, and we are
uncertain to which of these causes it is to be referred
in a particular case, then if we are sure that the
question whether it is to be referred to cause A or to
cause B does not affect our tranquillity, we need not
carry the investigation any further. The knowledge
that of all the causes which bring about this effect
there is none that in anyway disturbs our tranquillity,
conduces to that tranquillity just as much as would
the precise knowledge to which of these given causes
the effect on a given occasion is due. How this
principle works may be seen from the application
made by Epicurus himself in the extant letter to
1
79> 8o * c-> P- 29, 6-
THE ATOMIC THEORY 279
Pythocles.
1
The fifth and sixth books of the poem
of Lucretius traverse the same ground and the same
method is there employed. In investigating a phe-
nomenon of the class defined whose cause is un-
known, Epicurus, on principle, stops short so soon
as he has reached a plurality of causes any one of
which is upon analogy judged capable of producing
the effect under investigation without calling in
supernatural agency. Over the results so obtained,
which will appear to some ludicrous, to others
lamentable, the friends of the philosopher will prefer
to throw a veil.
"There is yet one more point to seize, viz., that
the greatest anxiety ofthehuman mind arises through
the belief that these heavenly bodies are blessed and
eternal, and that at the same time they have wills
and actions and causality inconsistent with this be-
lief, and through expecting and apprehending some
everlasting evil either because of the myths or be-
cause we are in dread of the insensibility of death, as
if it had to do with us, and through being reduced
to this state not by conviction, but by a certain irra-
tional perversity, so that, ifwe do not set bounds to
our terror, we endure as much or even more intense
anxiety than if we held these beliefs. But mental
tranquillity means to be released from all these
troubles and to cherish a continual remembrance
of the highest and most important truths. Hence
we must attend to present feelings and sense-percep-
tions, whether those of mankind in general or those
peculiar to the individual, and to all the clear evidence
at hand, given by each ofthe standards oftruth. For
by studying them we shall rightly trace to its cause
and banish the source of disturbance and dread,
1
Diogenes LaSrtius, Book X, 84-116; Epicurea, pp. 35~55-
280 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
accounting for celestial phenomena and the rest of
the things which from time to time befall, which
cause the utmost alarm to the rest of mankind."
l
This brings us very nearly to the close of the letter
to Herodotus in which Epicurus, as he goes on to
say, has given an epitome of his physical theory so
adequate and yet so compressed that he recommends
his pupil to commit it to memory. Once more, it
will be seen, he emphasises the subordination of all
physical inquiries to ethical considerations. His sole
aim is to banish for ever from the mind those fertile
sources of disturbance, superstition, and terror. In
so far as these anxieties are due to ignorance, their
proper cure is knowledge, and within these bounds
the pursuit of knowledge should be encouraged, not
for its own sake far from it but as the indispen-
sable means to the great end of life, the tranquillity of
the individual. In the same spirit Lucretius, who
so faithfully reproduces his master's teaching, com-
mences his great task. At the outset of his poem,
after he has adduced the sacrifice of Iphigenia as the
crowning instance of the evils prompted by religion,
he introduces the first of the long series of Epicurean
dogmas with these words: "This terror, then, and
darkness of mind must be dispelled, not by the rays
of the sun and glittering shafts of day, but by the
aspect and the law of nature; the warp of whose
design we shall begin with this first principle, nothing
is ever gotten out of nothing by divine power. Fear,
in sooth, holds so in check all mortals, because they
see many operations go on in earth and heaven, the
causes of which they can in no way understand, be-
lieving them, therefore, to be done by power divine.
For these reasons when we shall have seen that noth-
81, 82, /. c,, p. 30, 8 sqq.
THE ATOMIC THEORY 281
ing can be produced from nothing, we shall then
more correctly ascertain that which we are seeking,
both the elements out of which everything can be
produced and the manner in which all things are
done without the hand of the gods."
1
Master and
pupil are at one in striving for spiritual freedom.
1
1, 146 sqq.
CHAPTER VII
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY
It remains to consider the attitude of Epicurus
toward religion. We have already seen that he was
at once iconoclast and believer. He rejected the
national polytheism but substituted for it a polythe-
ismof his own. Ever hostile to false conceptions and
utterly disbelieving the old time-honoured legends,
which played so great a part in the life and thought
and art of his time, he yet retained what he believed
to be the essence of religion, and a religion not merely
"within the bounds of reason alone," to employ
Kant's phrase, but even established on the solid basis
of experience. Such an attitude has often been a
stumbling block to students of the system, and the
difficulties with which it is surrounded required to be
unravelled with more than ordinary patience and
insight.
Atoms and void were, as we have seen, primary
ontological postulates for Epicurus, as they had been
for Leucippus and Democritus. If atoms and void
are postulated it is possible, they held, to account for
all that exists and all that occurs in the infinite
universe. Everything follows, said Democritus, by
natural necessity. Epicurus agreed, with a single
reservation, that, namely, which relates to the swerv-
ing of atoms at quite uncertain times and places
from an absolutely straight course. Even so, he
does not admit any force or power controlling the
282
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 283
atoms from outside, since movement is their inherent
and inalienable property. There is no room for
divine agency so long as that agency is conceived as
supernatural, and he emphatically declares that
within the universe itself there are no indications
ofpurpose or plan. If, then, anything exists to which
the attribute divine can be ascribed, it is certainly
not, as the Stoics held, the universe itself, and as
certainly it is not conscious beings in any way con-
trolling or interfering with the course of nature.
From this it would seem to follow that the existence
of gods, as ordinarily understood, must be denied,
or at any rate that Epicurus would be justified in
taking up an agnostic position as Protagoras had
done in the memorable words:
or do notjjxist I canaotjiell, for there are roany things
which hinderTFnowledge, especially the obscurity of
the problem and the shortness ofhuman life." But
neither Tipicurus nor Democritus himself acquiesced
in such a conclusion. On the contrary, they affirmed
the existence of beings higher than man. As there
can be little doubt that on this question the opinion
of his great predecessor influenced Epicurus, we may
give a short summary of the views of Democritus.
As Aristotle expressly testifies, he made no distinction
between soul, regarded as the vital principle, and
mind or intelligence. Soul in animals and mind in
man was simply the most perfect form of matter, and
at death the atoms composing the soul were scattered
asunder.
1
He accordingly rejected the hypothesis of
Anaxagoras that Nous or Mind must be assumed in
order to account for the origin of motion in the ma-
terial universe. Democritus held such an assump-
tion to be both futile and unnecessary, for motion was
1
Stobasus, Anthohgia, I, p. 384, 18, Wachsmuth.
284 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
eternal and of that which is eternal there can be no
beginning.
1
Later writers sometimes speak as if
Democritus held the spherical soul-atoms themselves
to be a divine element in the universe. But this is
an error against which we must carefully guard.
No doubt Democritus contrasted the soul with the
body as the divine with the human, but soul and
body were in his view alike corporeal, and " since
the corporeal substances are as various as the form
and composition of the atoms of which they consist,
it is also possible that one substance may have quali-
ties which belong to no other."
2
The divine ele-
ment, then, if Democritus used such an expression,
must be interpreted, not as a divine being or any
being at all, not as a world-soul controlling the
material universe from within, but simply as the
substance of soul, mind-stuff, the purest and most
perfect form ofmatter wherever it occurs in particular
beings. His attitude to popular conceptions of the
future life may be gathered from a remarkable frag-
ment preserved by Stobaeus: "Some men who do
not understand the dissolution of our mortal nature,
but are conscious of the misery in human existence,
painfully spend their allotted period of life in con-
fusion and fear, inventing lies about the time after
they are dead/'
3
How closely this fragment agrees
with the views of Epicurus the reader will not fail
to notice. In a lost work, On Hades, Democritus
collected and probably criticised the numerous fables
current in antiquity about the resuscitation of the
dead. In fact, he was the first Greek thinker who
in so many words denied the immortality of the soul.
1
See Cicero, DeNaturaDeorum, I, 120, Diels, Doxographi, p. 302.
a
Zeller, Pre-Socratics, Vol. II, p. 262, English translation.
8 Diels2
, Fragment 297.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 285
With regard to the divinities of the popular faith he
seems to have wavered. Sometimes he treated them
as allegorical expressions of ethical or physical ideas.
1
Thus Pallas stood originally for wisdom, Zeus for
the sky or ether. Only in later times did these con-
ceptions assume personal existence and become en-
dowed in the popular imagination with a bodily
shape. Sometimes he ascribed the origin of religion
to man's terror at the awe-inspiring phenomena of
nature, thunder and lightning, eclipses of the sun,
comets, earthquakes and the like, the phenomena
which, according to Epicurus, render the study of
nature indispensable, if mental composure is to be
assured. Thus the popular gods were converted into
natural forces or were made the assumed Causes of
natural phenomena. But at other times they were
reduced to mere daemons, such as in Greek mythology
occupied an intermediate position between gods and
men. Democritus assumed that in part the popular
faith rested on actual evidence of sense, and that
there are in the surrounding atmosphere beings who
are similar to man in form, but superior to him in
size, strength, and longevity. From these beings, as
from all others, emanate streams of atoms, which
by contact with the organs of sense, render the beings
visible and audible to men and even to the inferior
animals. They are erroneously held to be divine
and imperishable, although in truth they are not
indestructible, but merely slower to perish than man.
Of these beings and their images there were two
kinds, the one kindly and beneficent, the other de-
structive and harmful. Hence, Democritus is said
to have prayed that he might meet with such images
as were kindly and beneficent. He contrived to fit
1
C). Diels3
, Fragments 2, 30.
286 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
this assumption to the popular belief in dreams and
presages of the future, for the phantom images un-
fold to us the designs of the beings from which they
emanate and reveal what is going on in other parts of
the world. Sextus, from whom this information is
drawn, expressly says that these daemons were the
only gods whose existence Democritus admitted.
1
Scanty as are the materials, it is abundantly evident
that a belief in these superhuman phantoms, gigantic,
long-lived, intelligent, is quite compatible with the
main principles of atomism. They are products of
atoms and of atomic movements, structures, gener-
able, and dissoluble like all the other atomic com-
pounds which we know as particular things. In
short, D&pocritus could believe, not only in man, but
in super-man without compromising his fundamental
positions, that all takes place by natural necessity,
that nothing really exists but atoms eternally moving
and the void space in which they move.
Let us now suppose that a materialist sincerely
adopting the atomic theory sets about the task of
criticising and revising this particular doctrine of
long-lived daemons and phantom images. Where
does it require modification ? The starting-point for
further inquiry would be the alleged evidence of
experience, whether in sense or imagination; and, as
these apparitions occur most often by night, the
whole province of sleep and dreams must be investi-
gated. A single fragment shows in what a matter-
of-fact way the materialist Democritus dealt with
these phenomena. The images in question had their
seat in the sinews and the marrow when they aroused
and played upon our souls, and by means ofthe veins
and arteries and the brain itself they penetrated to
1
Sextus Empiricus, IX, 19; 42,
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 287
the inmost parts ofthe frame.
1
IfEpicurus had been
an original thinker, if the love of knowledge for its
own sake had had the smallest weight with him, a
very slight advance in psychology would have sug-
gested misgivings. But with his stereotyped canons
of inquiry and his empirical theory of knowledge he
had no difficulty in swallowing all that was erroneous
in the view of Democritus and contrived to modify
it in exactly that direction which brought it into
violent conflict with the main principles of atomism.
The gods of Epicurus differ from the gigantic phan-
toms or daemons of Democritus in three particulars.
In the first place, they do not dwell in this or any
other world, but in the intermundia or interspaces
between world and world ; secondly, they"' are not
divided into beings beneficent and beings malignant,
but are all entirely indifferent to and removed from
human interests; thirdly, instead of being merely
long-lived, they are indestructible and eternal. This
last characteristic is incompatible with atomism,
which can provide no satisfactory answer to the
question
:
If all be atoms, how then should the Gods,
Being atomic, not be dissoluble,
Not follow the great law ?
The best excuse which his champions can offer
(and a lame excuse it is) refers us once more to pre-
conceptions, mental impressions, and the canon of
truth. Epicurus, we are told, felt bound to believe
that to be true which was attested, or not contested,
by experience; felt also bound to hold that no pre-
1
Hermippus, as quoted by Diels, Archiu fur Gesckichte der Philoso-
phic, VII, p. 155 sq.
288 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
conception can have arisen except through many
previous impressions superposed, and that every
impression corresponds to objective reality. All men
have the preconception, which implies a multitude
of previous impressions, of gods. Out of various
attributes ascribed to the gods he selected two as
fundamental, and the qualities inferred, blessedness
and immortality, must belong to the real object
which produced the impressions and consequent
preconception. Epicurus thus comes before us as a
theologian, indeed as a rationalist in theology. We
can trace the steps which led him to his belief in the
existence of gods. There is first the universal dif-
fusion of the belief that gods exist. The universality
of this belief appeared to him to establish its truth.
This is the argument reproduced by Cicero's Epi-
curean authority in his treatise on the nature of the
gods
:
"Since the belief in question was determined
by no ordinance or custom or law, and since a stead-
fast unanimity continues to prevail among all men
without exception, it must be understood that the
gods exist. For we have notions ofthem implanted,
or rather innate, within us, and, as that upon which
the nature of all men is agreed must needs be true,
their existence must be acknowledged. If their exis-
tence is all but universally admitted, not only among
philosophers, but also among those who are not
philosophers, there is a further admission that must
in consistency be made, namely, that we possess a
preconception which makes us think of them as
blessed and immortal. For nature, that gave us the
notion of gods as such, has also engraved in our
minds the conviction that they are blessed and eter-
nal."
l
Here it is important to remember that this
1 De Natura Deorum, I, c. XVII, 44.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 289
preconception is not an innate idea in Locke's sense
of the term, as something stamped upon the soul at
birth, but is used in its technical Epicurean sense
and denotes a generic type, a permanent deposit,
made by the repetition and superposition of similar
impressions. In the case of the gods these impres-
sions are always impressions upon the mind, for the
emanations from the gods are atom-complexes alto-
gether too fine to affect any sense-organ so as to be
perceived by sense. As Lucretius says: "The fine
substance of the gods far withdrawn from our senses
is hardly seen by the thought of the mind; and,
since it has ever eluded the touch and stroke of the
hands, it must touch nothing which is tangible for
us; for that cannot touch which does not admit of
being touched in turn/'
*
To proceed. If the universal preconception estab-
lishes, as Epicurus believes, the existence of gods, it
also establishes the characteristic attributes, perfect
happiness, and immortality, which all men agree in
ascribing to the gods. Epicurus, in the letter to
Menceceus already cited, says: "First believe that
God is a being blessed and immortal, according to the
notion of a god commonly held among men. . . .
For verily there are gods and the knowledge ofthem
is manifest." Apparently he accepts both blessed-
ness and immortality as characteristics given in the
preconception. From these many other attributes
may be inferred by reason. Both blessedness and
immortality would be impaired by the possession of
bodies of the same dense capacity which belongs to
our own. Hence we can only assign to them a body
analogous to the human, ethereal, consisting of the
finest atoms. They have not body, but quasi-body,
1
Lucretius, V, 148.
290 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
which does not contain blood, but quasi-blood.
1
As their opponents said jeeringly, they are mere
silhouettes or gods in outline, destitute of solidity.
Again, such bodies as they have could not live in this
or any world without being exposed to the ruin which
would, in time, overwhelm it and them, and in the
meantime they would live in a state of fear, which is
incompatible with perfect bliss. Hence, Epicurus
gave to them as their habitation the spaces between
the worlds. Nor, again, can they be supposed to
take any part in governing the course of events, for
the anxieties and responsibilities of such an office
would be fatal to happiness. "God does nothing,
is involved in no occupations, and projects no works;
he rejoices in his own wisdom and virtue, and is
assured that his state will always be one of the high-
est felicity eternally prolonged," says the Epicurean
in Cicero.2
This being so, men have nothing to fear
and nothing to hope from the gods, and we can now
appreciate the full force of the first golden maxim :
"A blessed and eternal being has no troubles itself,
and brings no trouble upon any other; hence it is
exempt from movements of anger and favour, for
every such movement implies weakness." This
maxim is paraphrased by Lucretius as follows: "For
the nature of gods must ever in itself of necessity
enjoy immortality together with supreme repose, far
removed and withdrawn from our concerns; since
exempt from every pain, exempt from all dangers,
strong in its own resources, not wanting aught of us,
it is neither gained by favours nor moved by anger."
3
In the letter to Menoeceus the belief that the great-
est evils happen to the wicked and the greatest bless-
1
Cicero, De Natura Deorum, c. XVIII, 49.
2
75., c. XIX., 51. Lucretius, II, 646.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 291
ings happen to the good from the hand of the gods,
is reckoned by Epicurus among the false assump-
tions of the multitude. In his view, to punish the
wicked is to be moved with anger, to reward the
righteous is to be moved with favour, and he pro-
nounces both states alike incompatible with happi-
ness. His gods are entirely indifferent to the whole
course of the world, and consequently to the fortunes
of humanity. Beyond these fundamental positions
the authority of Epicurus himself does not carry us.
But his followers would seem to have somewhat en-
larged the picture. Philodemus speculated freely on
the mode of divine existence. The gods would not
need sleep, sleep being a partial death, only required
as a means of restoration after fatigue. They must
have nourishment, though this must be adapted to
the peculiar constitution of their bodies. If they
could not communicate with each other, they would
lose the highest means of enjoyment, and they must
therefore employ language, Greek or something like
it. In short, he conceives of the gods as a society of
Epicurean philosophers, male and female, who have
everything they can desire and full opportunities of
converse. Such gods as these alone inspire no fear
in their worshippers, but are reverenced for their
very perfection. Moreover, these gods are innumer-
able. If the number of mortal beings is infinite, the
law of isonomy, counterpoise, or equal distribution
requires that the number of immortals should be not
less.
1
We do not know whether the master would have
approved all these fantastic speculations. Nor are
we informed of his conclusions on one other most
difficult point. This is usually described as the
1
Cf. Cicero, De Nature Deorum, I, 49-
292 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
physical constitution of the Epicurean gods. The
crucial passages in Cicero
1
are tantalising from their
obscurity, and it may very possibly be that Cicero
himselfhad only imperfectly apprehended the mean-
ing of the words which he translated. He does,
however, commit himself to the statement that the
gods, though material, are not firm and solid like the
gross bodies of men and visible things, but of a far
finer texture, and that they have not numerical or
material, but only formal identity. This has been
interpreted to mean
2
that the matter ofwhich they
are composed, instead of remaining fixed and iden-
tically the same through a finite space of time, as is
the case with visible and tangible objects, is per-
petually and instantaneously passing away, to be
replaced by fresh matter. The form or arrangement,
of matter alone remains unchanged. Perpetual suc-
cessions of images, z. *., atom-complexes or films
having arisen out of the infinite void, stream to a sort
of focus, and there, by their meeting, constitute for a
moment the being ofthe gods; then they stream away
in all directions, and upon occasion pass into the
material mind ofman, bringing with them the notion
ofthe blessed and eternal beingwhose body they for a
moment helped to compose and whose form they
still bear. The contrast between material or nu-
merical identity and formal identity can be illustrated
by the difference between a standing pond or arti-
ficial lake and a river or, still better, a cascade. The
water in the artificial lake remains the same for a
finite space of time, whereas, though the form of the
1
Cicero, De Natura Deorum, I, 49, 105, 109.
2
First by Lachelier (Revue de Philologie, 1877, p. 264), who has been
followed by W. Scott (Journal of Philology, XII, pp. 212 sqq,) and by
Giussani (Lucretius, Vol. I, pp. 227 sqq.).
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 293
flowing river and the cascade is constant, the drops
of water which compose them are never for one in-
stant materially the same or numerically identical.
The water keeps flowing on and away, the form alone
persists. Following this clue, the same ingenious
interpreters, Lachelier, W. Scott, and Giussani, at-
tempt to gain support for their hypothesis from the
doctrine of isonomy (aquabilis trtbutio), which W.
Scott expounds as follows: "It is the principle that
in infinity all things have their match, omnia omnibus
paribus paria respondent. By this Cicero seems to
mean a law of averages or chances; the law, namely,
that of two alternatives equally possible each will
occur with equal frequency if an infinite number of
cases be taken. In the present case there is a double
application of this principle. First, the number of
atoms in motion in the universe being infinite, there
must, on the whole,be equal numbers ofatom-motions
tending on the one hand to destroy and on the other
hand to feed or maintain composite bodies. Lucre-
tius, though he does not use the word isonomy, lays
great stress on the thing in this application. 'Thus
neither can death-dealing motions' (motus exitiales}
'keep the mastery always nor entomb existence for
evermore, nor on the other hand can the motions
which give birth and increase to things (genitales
auctificique motus) preserve them always after they
are born. Thus the war of first beginnings, waged
from eternity, is carried on with dubious issue/
1
By the auctlfici motus we must understand the ac-
cretion of constituent atoms to a body in the process
of growth ; and by the motus exitiales their excretion
or separation from it in the process of decay. But,
again, this balance of opposing tendencies may itself.
1
Lucretius, II, 569 $gq.-, cf. also II, 522.
294 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
be preserved in two different ways. The processes
of growth and of decay, of combination and of dis-
solution, may either prevail ultimately in each in-
dividual object, so that the result on the whole will
be a perpetual decay of existing things, accompanied
by a perpetual growth of fresh things in their place;
or the two processes may go on simultaneously in a
given object, so as to produce an equilibrium, the
result of which will be eternal duration. Conse-
quently (to apply the principle of isonomy once
more), if we take an infinite number of cases (that
is, if we consider the whole universe), the alternate
and the simultaneous action of the two processes
must go on to an equal extent. Now, in our world
(and, by analogy, in all the worlds) the first alter-
native is that which universally prevails; that is, the
motions of growth and of decay operate alternately,
both on the world as a whole and (at shorter inter-
vals) on each individual within it, thus producing uni-
versal death and universal birth. Hence, outside the
worlds, or in the intermundia, room must be found for
the other alternative; that is, the motus auctifici and
the motus exitiales must there work simultaneously
and, instead of producing a succession of different
beings, must result in the immortality of such beings
as exist. We see that the exact point proved by the
principle of isonomy is the perpetual continuance in
the case of the gods, and in their case alone, of the
auctifici motus; and that it is on this perpetual con-
tinuance that their immortality depends. The Epi-
curean," in De Natura Deorum,
1
"when asked how
it is that the stream of matter in the form of images
which goes to form the gods never fails, replies at first,
that it is because there is an infinite supply of matter
1
109.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 295
to draw upon; but to the objection that this argument
would tell equally for the immortality of all things,
he answers, in effect, that the principle of isonomy
determines the supply of the infinite in such a way as
to produce death and birth in some beings and
immortality in others/'
1
Giussani, the Italian editor
of Lucretius, adopts this hypothesis and goes a
step further when he affirms that "isonomy was ex-
cogitated to prove precisely the perpetuity of the
auctifici motus in the case of the gods and in their
case only/'
2
Giussani assumes that the immortality
of the gods is exposed to special danger from hyper-
trophy or the over-assimilation of nutriment, because
they live in the tntermundia amid an enormous
superabundance of food from the atomic ocean sur-
rounding them. If the gods assimilate more matter
than is sufficient for sirftple preservation, we are
justified by Lucretius 3 in inferring that such excessive
growth must be followed by a period in which the
organism cannot assimilate enough to repair the
waste that is going on. What is the cause of the
death of men and animals ? It is the fact that the
matter of which they are formed is temporarily per-
sistent. The matter forming my body, which is, for
the moment, my matter, may be so suddenly injured
or dispersed by an accident, or it may waste so much
faster than slow assimilation of food can restore it,
that death must follow. But no artillery fire, how-
ever violent and prolonged, could possibly destroy
Niagara, though every shot in its passage through the
falls temporarily dislodged drops ofwater. For it is
the persistence of matter, which preserves a stone in
being, that becomes in an organism the cause of
1
Journal of Philology, XII, pp. 222 sqq,
a
Giussani, Lucretius, Vol. I, p. 263.
3
II, 1115-1140.
296 STOIG AND EPICUREAN
danger and death. To make it possible for ever-
lasting beings composed of atoms to exist, it is not
enough, Giussani maintains, that the two processes of
waste and assimilation should go on simultaneously
and the gain be equal to the loss. For the immor-
tality of such beings an absolute non-persistence of
matter is necessary. Such a condition is supplied if
the bodies of the gods be supposed to retain identity
of form amid perpetual and instantaneous change of
matter in short, ifthey resemble the cascade or flow-
ing river, and not the pond or artificial lake of the
illustration. So far Giussani. All are agreed that
in men and animals personal identity is compatible
with slow but persistent change of constituent matter.
Itwould seem, then, that, on the hypothesis proposed,
the identity of these cascade-like gods would, after
all, differ from human identity in degree only and
not in kind.
I have thought it right to present to the reader
these ingenious speculations as far as possible in the
words of the scholars who have put them forward.
It is highly improbable that the whole question
should not have received full discussion at some time
or other, ifnot in the voluminous works ofthe master
himself, at any rate in those of his faithful disciples
who were recognised as authoritative expounders of
the system. The buried treasures of Herculaneum
included many treatises by Epicurus and by Philo-
demus, and now that it has been decided to carry on
a systematic excavation of this interesting site, we
may reasonably anticipate much additional informa-
tion on this and other obscure points of Epicurean
belief. It may be that such information will cor-
roborate and justify the shrewd conjectures which
have been put forward. It may also be that fresh
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 297
discoveries will render them obsolete and furnish us
with explanations and solutions not hitherto dreamt
of. With the evidence which we already possess be-
fore them, most scholars who have dealt with Epi-
cureanism have been unable to accept as satisfactory
the hypothesis proposed by Lachelier and in the
main adopted by Scott and Giussani. They either
g've
up the problem as insoluable or, like Schomann,
irzel, and J. B. Mayor, offer suggestions of their
own which, however, are not more convincing. It
may be well to point out what its advocates do not
explicitly emphasise that by the hypothesis of Lache-
lier and Scott the eternity of gods in the past as well
as in the future seems to be implied. These ideals of
wisdom and virtue must always have existed. Ifthey
are not perishable, neither are they generable. In a
universe without purpose or plan, in which every-
thing is brought about by blind physical forces, this
is indeed surprising. It mightwell have beenthought
that Epicurus, of all men, would be the least likely
to call upon faith to redress the balance ofreason and
introduce as articles of belief conclusions rejected by
science. But if he reasoned in the way suggested
by Scott and Giussani, what he did virtually comes
to this. Our experience of this world shows us be-
ings generable and perishable. From this he is sup-
posed to take a gigantic step; to our experience of
this world he adds "and by analogy of all worlds."
There are no immortal beings, then, in any one ofthe
infinite worlds. But we have the preconception of
a blessed and immortal being. Therefore, such is
supposed to be his strange conclusion we are bound
to believe that immortal beings exist, and, though
the worlds are used up, there still remain the inter-
mundia. Verily, the credulity of a materialist and
298 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
an empiricist is not to be surpassed by the imagina-
tive flights of all the idealists. The scoffer might
well be excused his frivolous jest that Epicurus pen-
sioned off the gods into die intermundia. The
Athenian sage may have come to such conclusions on
such reasoning, but the cautious inquirer will not
commit himself until he receives better evidence than
has hitherto been adduced.
However this may be, the letter to Menoeceus lays
down with clearness and consistency the views of the
master on the popular religion. He claims for him-
self and for all other dissentients from the national
faith freedom of conscience, and he further claims
that disbeliefin the popular theology is yet compatible
with true piety. "For verily there are gods," he
there says, "and the knowledge of them is manifest;
but they are not such as the multitude believe, seeing
that men do not steadfastly maintain the notions they
form respecting them," the notions, namely, of bles-
sedness and immortality. "Not the man who denies
the gods worshipped by the multitude, but he who
affirms of the gods what the multitude believes about
them, is truly impious." Such a statement reveals
the courageous free-thinker. He is not content with
criticising the current polytheism, with its immoral
fables and lying legends; he is not content with
denouncing the doctrine of Providence as false and
absurd. He assumes the offensive and brands as
impious the acceptance ofthe beliefs which he rejects.
It is the firm conviction that the popular religion was
a degrading superstition, enslaving men's minds and
causing the greatest evils; it is this which lends to the
denunciations of Lucretius their moral earnestness
and impassioned fervour. The origin of religion he
traced, as Epicurus had done before him, to ignorance
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 299
and fear. Primitive man, knowing nothing ofthe true
causes of natural phenomena, chose to ascribe them
to higherpowers and naturally lived in aweand terror,
ever dreading the interference of incalculable beings
so mighty to harm. Lucretius expands the idea thus:
"They would see the system of heaven and the
different seasons of the year come round in regular
succession, and could not find out by what causes
this was done; therefore, they would seek a refuge in
handing over all things to the gods and supposing all
things to be guided by their nod. And they placed
in heaven the abodes and realms of the gods, because
night andmoon are seen to roll through heaven, moon,
day and night and night's austere constellations and
night-wandering meteors ofthe sky and flying bodies
of flame, clouds, sun, rains, snow, winds, lightning,
hail, and rapid rumblings and loud threatful thun-
der-claps. O hapless race of men, when that they
charged the gods with such acts and coupled with
them bitter wrath! What groanings did they then
beget for themselves, what wounds for us, what tears
for our children's children ! No act is it of piety to be
often seen with veiled head to turn to a stone and
approach every altar and fall prostrate on the ground,
to sprinkle the altars with much blood of beasts and
link vow on to vow, but rather to be able to look on
all things with a mind at peace. For when we turn
our gaze on the heavenly quarters of the great upper
world and ether fast above the glittering stars, and
direct our thoughts to the courses of the sun and
moon, then into our breasts burdened with other ills
that fear as well begins to exalt its reawakened head,
the fear thatwe may haply find the power ofthe gods
to be unlimited, able to wheel the bright stars in
their varied motion; for lack of power to solve the
300 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
question troubles the mind with doubts, whether
there was ever a birth-time of the world, and whether
likewise there is to be any end; how far the walls of
the world can endure this strain of restless motion; or
whether, gifted by the grace of the gods with an ever-
lasting existence, they may glide on through a never-
ending tract of time and defy the strong powers of
immeasurable ages. Again, who is there whose mind
does not shrink into itself with fear of the gods,
whose limbs do not cower in terror, when the parched
earth rocks with the appalling thunderstroke and
rattlings run through the great heaven ? Do not
people and nations quake, and proud monarchs
shrink into themselves, smitten with fear of the gods,
lest for any foul transgression or overweening word
the heavy time of reckoning has arrived at its ful-
ness ? When, too, the utmost fury of the headstrong
wind passes over the sea and sweeps over its waters
the commander of a fleet, together with his mighty
legions and elephants, does he not draw near with
vows to seek the mercy of the gods and ask in prayer
with fear and trembling a lull in the winds and pro-
pitious gales; but all in vain, since often caught up
in the furious hurricane he is borne none the less to
the shoals ofdeath ? So constantly does some hidden
power trample on human grandeur and is seen to
tread under its heel and make sport for itself of the
renowned rods and cruel axes. Again, when the
whole earth rocks under their feet and towns tumble
with the shock or doubtfully threaten to fall, what
wonder that mortal men abase themselves and make
over to the gods in things here on earth high pre-
rogatives and marvellous powers sufficient to govern
all things?"
1
1
Lucretius, V, 1183 sgq.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 301
Clearly, then, no prayers, no vows, no presage of
the future ought to find a place in religion as con-
ceived by Epicurus. The worship which alone he
approves is such joyous reverence as the human
spirit, unmoved by hope or fear, spontaneously and
disinterestedly proffers to superhuman excellence and
eternal blessedness. If fear is the basis of super-
stition as Petronius tersely puts it, "it was fear that
first made gods in the world" then freedom from
fear must be the work of enlightenment. It is as the
saviour and deliverer of mankind that Epicurus is
acclaimed by the Roman poet. "If we must speak
as the acknowledged grandeur of the theme itself
demands, a god he was, a god, most noble Memmius,
who first found out that plan of life which is now
termed wisdom, and who by trained skill rescued
existence from such great billows and such thick
darkness."
i
"Soon as thy philosophy, issuing from
a godlike intellect, has begun with loud voice to pro-
claim the nature of things, the terrors ofthe mind are
dispelled, the walls of the world part asunder, I see
things in operation throughout the whole void; the
divinity of the gods is revealed and their tranquil
abodes, which neither winds do shake nor clouds
drench with rains nor snow, congealed by sharp
frost, harms with hoary fail; an ever cloudless ether
o'ercanopies them, and they laugh with light shed
largely around. Nature, too, supplies all their wants
and nothing ever impairs their peace of mind. But,
on the other hand, the Acherusian quarters are no-
where to be seen, though earth is no bar to all things
*being descried which are in operation underneath
our feet throughout the void. At all this a kind
of godlike delight mixed with shuddering awe comes
1
Lucretius, V, 7 syq.
302 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
over me to think that nature by thy power is laid thus
visibly open, is thus unveiled on every side."
l
Epi-
curus directs his searching glance over the entire
universe. In the tranquil abodes of the divinities
he descries an external heaven, but nowhere can he
find an external hell. The Homeric Olympus was
the creation of the poet's fancy and not the picture
ofanymountain summitwithin his experience. Even
more aloof from all possible, as well as actual, ex-
perience is the philosopher's
lucid interspace of world and world,
Where never creeps a cloud, or moves a wind,
Nor ever falls the least white star of snow,
Nor ever lowest roll of thunder moans,
Nor sound of human sorrow mounts to mar
Their sacred everlasting calm.
With the rival school of the Stoics Epicurus agrees
in holding that the true hell is the life of the wicked
here upon earth. The only difference is that the
Stoics emphasised the moral degradation of the
sinner, the feelings of shame, the loss of self-respect,
the consciousness of failure to attain man's proper
end, while Epicurus dwells most upon the boding
fear of punishment and the terror of a guilty con-
science. In a fine passage Lucretius at once ridi-
cules and allegorises the current fables of punish-
ment inflicted on the guilty in the unseen world.
"And those things, sure enough, which are fabled
to be in the deep of Acheron, do all exist for us in
this life. No Tantalus, numbed by groundless terror,
as the story is, fears, poor wretch, ahugestonehanging
in air; but in life rather a baseless dread of the gods
vexes mortals : the fall they fear is such fall of luck
1
Lucretius, III, 14 $q$.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 303
as chance brings to each. Nor do birds eat a way
into Tityos laid in Acheron, nor can they, sooth to
say, find, during eternity, food to peck under his
large breast. However huge the bulk of body he
extends, though such as to take up with outspread
limbs not nine acres merely, but the whole earth, yet
will he not be able to endure everlasting pain and
supply food from his own body forever. But he is
for us a Tityos,whom as he grovels in love vultures
rend and bitter, bitter anguish eats up or troubled
thoughts from any other passion do rive. In life, too,
we have a Sisyphus before our eyes, who is bent on
asking from the people the rods and cruel axes, and
always retires defeated and disappointed. For to ask
for power which, empty as it is, is never given, and
always in the chase of it to undergo severe toil, this is
forcing uphill with much effort a stone which, after
all, rolls back again from the summit and seeks in
headlong haste the levels of the plain/ Then to be
ever feeding the thankless nature of the mind, and
never to fill it full and sate it with good things, as the
seasons of the year do for us, when they come round
and bring their fruits and varied delights, though
after all we are never filled with the enjoyments of
life, this, methinks, is to do what is told of the
maidens in the flower of their age, to keep pouring
water into a perforated vessel which, in spite of all,
can never be filled full. Moreover, Cerberus and
the furies and yon privation of light are idle tales, as
well as all the rest, Ixion's wheel and black Tartarus
belching forth hideous fires from his throat: things
which nowhere are nor, sooth to say, can be. But
there is in life a dread of punishment for evil deeds,
signal as the deeds are signal, and for atonement of
guilt, the prison and the frightful hurling down from
304 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the rock, scourgings, executioners, the dungeons of
the doomed, the pitch, the metal plate, torches; and
even though these are wanting, yet the conscience-
stricken mind through boding fears applies to itself
goads and frightens itself with whips, and sees not,
meanwhile, what end there can be of ills or what
limit, at last, is to be set to punishments, and fears
lest these very evils be enhanced after death. The
life of fools at length becomes a hell here on
earth."
1
The Epicureans were never tired ofarguing against
the conception ofGod as either Creator or Providence,
against divine interference with the course of nature,
either to create, to sustain, or to destroy. On these
points their chief antagonists were the Stoics, but
they argued just as fiercely against the Peripatetics,
who denied Providence, upheld the eternity of the
world, and yet maintained that nature in all her
operations is unconsciously working to an end. On
the analogy of any product of human ingenuity, the
work of creation implies tools, levers, machines,
agents, and materials. How, it is asked, could air,
fire, water, and earth have been obedient and sub-
missive to the architect's will ? Besides, if this work
began at any point in time, why did the Creator re-
frain from creating until just that instant, and what
was his motive for starting then ? What delight
can the Creator find in the variety of his work ? And
if it be a delight, why was he able to dispense with
it for so long ? If the work was undertaken for the
sake of man, it has failed in its object, so far, at least,
as the unwise majority of men are concerned.
2
Lucretius puts these arguments as follows:
1
Lucretius, III, 977 sqq.
3
Cicero, De Natura Deorum, cc., VIII, IX.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 305
"To say that for the sake ofmen they have willed
to set in order the glorious nature of the world, and,
therefore, it is meet to praise the work of the gods,
calling as it does for all praise, and to believe that
it will be eternal and immortal, and to invent and
add other figments of the kind, Memmius, is all
sheer folly. For what advantage can our gratitude
bestow on immortal and blessed beings, that for our
sakes they should take in hand to administer aught ?
And what novel incident should have induced them,
hitherto at rest, so long after to desire to change
their former life ? For it seems natural he should
rejoice in a new state of things, whom old things
annoy; but for himwhom no ill has befallen in times
gone by, when he passed a pleasant existence, what
could have kindled in such a one a love of change ?
Did life lie grovelling in darkness and sorrow until
the first dawn of the birthtime of things ? Or what
evil had it been for us never to have been born ?
Whoever has been born must want to continue in
life so long asfond pleasure shall keep him; but for
him who has never tasted the love, never been on the
lists of life, what harm not to have been born ?
Whence, again, was first implanted in the gods a
pattern for begetting things in general as well as the
preconception of what men are, so that they knew
and saw in mind what they wanted to make ? And
in what way was the power of first-beginnings ever
ascertained, to know what could be effected by a
change in their mutual arrangements, unless nature
herself gave the model for making things ? But if I
did not know what first-beginnings of things are, yet
this, judging by the very arrangements of heaven,
I would venture to affirm, and, led by many other
facts, to maintain that the nature
*
of things has by
306 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
no means been made for us by divine power, so
great are the defects with which it is encum-
bered/'
l
Philosophic criticism of the popular faith was no
new thing in Greece. It began with Xenophanes,
was rampant in the age of the sophists and was in-
dorsed by Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics. As a
rule, the ancients were remarkably tolerant in matters
of religious belief. The prosecutions ofAnaxagoras,
Protagoras, and Socrates at Athens were primarily
political, and in succeeding centuries even avowed
atheism entailed little personal risk. The Epicure-
ans were not unwilling to join in the services of the
national religion, and did not hesitate to claim that
their views were more consistent with true piety than
those of their rivals the Stoics. Their polytheism,
at any rate, was sincere, and they could dispense
with the artifices and allegorical interpretations by
which the one living universe was converted into a
hierarchy of personified natural forces. At the same
time, they were free to maintain their negative at-
titude, to denounce and ridicule as superstitious what-
ever in the current beliefs was inconsistent with their
own fundamental assumptions.
It is not easy to determine precisely the standing
and influence which this school of free-thinkers ob-
tained in the Greek world. It is quite certain that
Epicurus, in his own lifetime, succeeded in awaken-
ing public interest and winning wide popularity, that
after his death his adherents grew and multiplied, and
that the questionwhy there were so many Epicureans
was constantly propounded and variously answered.
We hear of jealousy and enmity between them and
rival schools, but only once or twice is there any
1
Lucretius, V, 156-159, 165-186, 195-199.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 307
suggestion of persecution on religious grounds. At
the beginning of the second century B. C. it is as-
serted that some Epicureans who had taken refuge
at Lyttos, in Crete, were banished by a decree, which
denounced them as enemies of the gods, men who
had invented a womanish, ignoble, and disgraceful
philosophy. The decree went on to threaten any of
them who dared to return with a horrible death by
torture. At Messene a similar decree outlawed the
Epicureans as defilers of the temples and a disgrace
to philosophy through their atheism and indifference
to politics. They were ordered to be beyond the
borders of Messene before sunset and the magis-
trates were directed to purify the city and shrines
from all traces of the heretics.
1
It is highly probable
that these are isolated cases of political rancour, and
that the chiefcount in the indictmentwas not atheism,
but indifference, that is, refusal to become the sub-
servient tools of some political faction, the odium
theologicum being invoked by the winning side against
irreconcilable foes. At Rome, where politics was so
closely bound up with religion, the profession of
Epicureanism never exposed any one to pains or
penalties. The circle of Cicero's friends included
several convinced Epicureans, who enjoyed universal
esteem. Such were his correspondent Atticus and
Cassius, one of the conspirators against Caesar.
The poem of Lucretius, again, exerted a powerful
influence, as is seen in the evident leaning of both
Virgil and Horace toward the system which he had
so passionately advocated. Two centuries later
Lucian gives us a vivid narrative of events in Paphla-
gonia, which show the Epicureans of that district to
have been as fearless enemies of superstition as Epi-
1
Suidas, Lexicon, $. v, "Epicurus."
308 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
curus or Lucretius himself could have desired.
1
A
certain Alexander laid claim to prophetic powers and
established his oracle at Abonuteichos. The fame of
his responses, his growing power and influence, which
extended even to Rome, the tricks and impostures by
which he deluded those who consulted him and the
violent measures which he took to put down all op-
position may be read in the pages of Lucian and
formed the subjectofone ofFroude's "ShortStudies."
The enemies with whom Alexander waged relentless
war were the Christians and the Epicureans. Both
alike he denounced as atheists, excluding them from
his oracle and from the festivalswhich he hadfounded.
Moreover, by his orders on a public occasion, the
golden maxims of Epicurus were burnt and their
ashes flung into the sea. The claims of this impostor
were tacitly recognised by the Neo-Platonists, Neo-
Pythagoreans, and Stoics, and, as Lucian shrewdly
observes, his knaveries would have imposed upon
anymanwho was not an intrepid inquirer after truth.
Among philosophers a Democritus, Epicurus, or
Metrodorus would alone have been his match, be-
cause the suspicions which such pretensions to the
miraculous naturally excite would, in their case, have
been fortified by the reasoned conviction that the
laws of nature are invariable and admit of no capri-
cious interference. Lucian, as his writings show,
was an adherent of no philosophical school. His
satire is directed against all impartially and his testi-
mony to the important services rendered by Epicure-
ans in the cause of truth and honesty is all the more
valuable on this account. He hated charlatans as
heartily as Voltaire. From some details which he
mentions it may be inferred that Alexander's in-
1
Lucian, Alexander Pseudomantis.
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 309
fluence was at its height during the reign of Marcus
Aurelius, and while the Stoic emperor was engaged
in his campaigns against the Marcomanni, 170-175
A. D.
Curiously enough, recent excavation has furnished
indisputable evidence of Epicurean activity during
the same century in another part of Asia Minor.
In the year 1884 two French scholars, Holleaux and
Paris, discovered inscriptions on the walls of the
market-place of the obscure Pisidian town (Enoanda.
They were copied in 1889 and again in 1895, and by
publication since have been made generally acces-
sible to scholars.
1
They reveal a striking story.
Diogenes of GEnoanda was a zealous Epicurean
teacher, who seems to have devoted his life to the
exposition of his system. When advancing years and
the premonitions of disease warned him of his ap-
proaching end he determined, as he tells us, to make
one last appeal to his countrymen in a permanent
form on behalf of the cause which he had so much at
heart. His motives were twofold. In the first
place, he had a genuine desire to benefit humanity
at large, not only his contemporaries, but posterity
and the casual strangers who might visit the place.
But we will quote his own words: "This writing
shall speak for me as if I were present, striving to
prove that nature's good, viz., tranquillity of mind,
is the same for one and all. There is another reason
for my setting up the inscription. Old age has now
brought me to the sunset ofmy life and on the verge
of departure; while acclaiming with a paean the con-
1
Bulletin fa Correspondence j&elleniqw, Vol. XVI, pp. 1-76; Vol.
XXI, pp. 346-443; an annotated edition was published by Teubner in
1907, under the title Diogenis (Enoandensis Fragments ordinavit et
explicavit Johannes William. See also the commentary of Usener, in
Rheinisches Museum^ Vol. 47.
310 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
summation of my pleasures, I wish now, before it is
too late, to succour the discerning. If it were one
or two or three or four or five or six or as many as you
like of such, but not too many, who were in evil
plight, I might have visited each individually and
tendered them the best advice as far as in me lay.
But the vast majority of men suffer from the plague
of false opinions and the number of victims increases
for in mutual emulation they catch the contagion
one from another, like sheep. Moreover, it is right
to succour those who shall come after us, for they,
too, belong to us, though as yet unborn; and it is
also a dictate of humanity to help the strangers who
sojourn among us. Since, then, the succour of an
inscribed writing reaches a greater number, I wish
to make use of this portico to exhibit in a public
place the remedy which brings salvation. For thus
I banish the vain terrors which hold us in subjection,
eradicating some pains altogether and confining such
as are due to nature within very moderate bounds
and reducing them to the smallest dimensions."
1
He had a further motive which the course of the
inscription makes sufficiently obvious, viz., to put
on record an effective answer to all the adversaries
of the Epicurean system. He proceeds to refute in
detail the views of Socrates, who is taken as a type
of all who declined to study natural science, the
Heraclitean doctrine of flux and universal relativity,
the early lonians, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Democ-
ritus, and finally the Stoics. The reader is en-
treated not to be content with a casual glance at the
inscription, but to give it an attentive study. The
author's enthusiasm and honesty of purpose are
obvious, but his scholarly attainments were hardly
1
Diogenis (EnoandensisFragmenta, Fragment I (William).
THE EPICUREAN THEOLOGY 311
adequate to his design, or he would never have fallen
into the mistake of attributing to Aristotle himself
the universal relativity which that philosopher refutes
as a doctrine of Heraclitus. Even in regard to the
system which he professed he seems to have been
misinformed on some minor points. It was the
ethical theory which he apprehended best and valued
most. The circumstances under which his singular
intention was formed and carried out are sufficient
proof that in his day Epicureanism had its propa-
ganda and was a living force, and that here, as else-
where, it was promulgated first and foremost as a
rule of life, a means of escape from human misery.
CHAPTER VIII
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY: CARNEADES
The word "
sceptic
" has a history of its own. In
its original meaning, harmless enough, it denoted
an inquirer, but even then, as people do not inquire
about that which they already know, it implied some
degree of uncertainty. Again, inquirers are often
confronted with difficult problems which by no
amount of study can be definitely solved. Certain
data point to one explanation, certain other data to
another and quite different explanation. In such
cases the inquirer, after weighing the evidence, may
still be in a state of suspense or indecision, unable to
make up his mind. Thus the term acquires a nega-
tive meaning; the sceptic becomes by easy stages a
doubter. When his doubts extend to conclusions
which most other men regard as true, he is apt to be
set down by them as a disbeliever, and the term
scepticism, as ordinarily applied both in philosophy
and religion, has come nowadays to imply a measure
of disbelief which is not part of its original connota-
tion. The scepticism of antiquity busied itself with
the problem of knowledge. But when compared
with cognate inquiries in modern philosophy, it ap-
pears in its scope and range almost ludicrously tenta-
tive, jejune, and superficial. That the object of
cognition was external reality, nay more, that it was
material reality, was not in that age seriously ques-
tioned. No one ever challenged the existence of a
312
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 313
real world of things lying behind the phenomena of
which we are conscious. Confronted by dogmatists
who maintained that they had certain knowledge of
the truth of things, ancient scepticism started like its
opponents with the assumption that things exist and
that there is a truth to know, thus at the outset beg-
ging the question which causes the modern thinker
his greatest perplexity. Its function, then, is purely
negative and largely polemical, yet, even thus cir-
cumscribed, it allowed greater activity to thought
than did the rival dogmatic systems. The impulse
to pure speculation, to seek knowledge for its own
sake, was, as we have seen, depreciated and almost
stifled both by the Stoics and by Epicurus. But it
survived, stunted and warped, it is true, but not
quite extinct among those independent critics who
refused allegiance to these and all other dogmatic
systems.
The ancient Sceptics fall into three groups. To
the first belong Pyrrho and his disciple Timon, with
whom negation had its modest beginnings. The next
group comprises the Sceptics of die Middle and New
Academy; its protagonists are Arcesilas and Car-
neades. It developed the theory of probabilism,
which led up to eclecticism, and the logical conse-
quence of eclecticism was the renunciation of scep-
ticism altogether. This final step was taken by the
later Academic Antiochus. The last group, the most
advanced in their scepticism, includes Agrippa,
^Enesidemus, and Sextus Empiricus, who are gener-
ally known as the later Sceptics. The works of
Sextus Empiricus have come down to us, while those
of his predecessors are mainly lost; indeed, most of
them wrote nothing, and of those who did little has
survived.
314 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Pyrrho of Elis accompanied Alexander's march
as far as India, and thus became acquainted with
Anaxarchus, a Democritean philosopher who took
part in the same expedition. After his return home
he lived to an honoured old age in his native city of
Elis, in poor circumstances, which he bore with
characteristic repose of mind. His disciple Timon
of Phlius, after winning a competency by lecturing
at Chalcedon, gravitated to Athens where he spent
the remainder of his days and wrote much both
in prose and verse. His most celebrated work was
a satirical poem entitled SHU, of which considerable
fragments remain. It consisted of three books. In
the first he spoke in his own person; the others took
the form of a dialogue between the author and the
ancient philosopher Xenophanes ofColophon,Timon
asking questions and Xenophanes answering them
at great length. By this device he secured an un-
bounded field for satire in a sarcastic account of
all philosophers, living and dead. Timon's wit is
incisive; he gives no quarter and his mock-heoric
style is enlivened with telling burlesques of Homer.
It is indirectly through this disciple, who was more of
a poet than a philosopher, that we derive the only
definite notice of Pyrrho*s teaching. According to
Timon, then and the report comes from the phil-
osopher Aristocles, who lived centuries afterward
*
there are three questions which the seeker after
happiness must consider: (i) What is the nature of
things ? (2) What ought to be our attitude to things ?
(3) What will be the result ifwe take up this attitude ?
Things, Pyrrho declared and it is obvious that by
things he meant external reality are all equally in-
distinguishable, incalculable, and unaccountable, and
1
In Eusebius, Pr. Ev., XIV, 18, 2.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 315
therefore sensations and opinions are neither true
nor false. This being so, the proper attitude is not
to trust them
*
but to preserve unwavering neutrality,
free from prejudice or inclination to either side, and
to say of any single object that it "no more is than is
not" or it "both is and is not" or it "neither is nor
is not" this or that. According to another authority,
2
Timon explained the formula "not more this than
that" as a refusal to define or to assent to a definition
of what a given thing is. Thus refusal to speak
(aphasia) is sometimes found as an equivalent. The
result of this attitude Timon affirmed to be mental
repose or imperturbability,
3 a tranquil and self-
centred indifference to a world ofwhich we can know
nothing. For their unwarranted judgments about
objects betray men into desire, painful effort, and
disappointment. Thus the end sought by the dog-
matists through the vain pursuit of knowledge is,
after all, more easily secured by the renunciation of
knowledge, and this end is a state of mind which,
as both Stoics and Epicureans agreed, is one con-
stituent mark oftrue happiness. For whether happi-
ness consisted in pleasure or in virtue, the rival schools
concurred in the belief that its realisation insured to
its possessor mental composure, serene and undis-
turbed.
It is not a little remarkable that this concise sum-
mary of the sceptical position should have been
ascribed to Pyrrho on the evidence of his disciple
Timon. We are informed that Pyrrho himselfwrote
nothing on philosophy. Moreover, Cicero frequently
mentions Pyrrho, but always as an austere moralist,
one might say an ascetic, who went even beyond the
1 In Eusebius, Pr. &v., XIV, 18, 3.
2
Diog. Laert., 75, 76.
8 Ataraxia. See Eusebius, Pr. Ev., XIV, 18, 3.
316 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Stoics in the attitude which he recommended toward
all external things. The Stoics held that we should
regard all objects except good and evil as indifferent
to us; Pyrrho, according to Cicero, held that the wise
man is actually insensible to these objects,
1
and many
stories were told or invented in antiquity exagger-
ating his alleged indifference to his environment.
Besides, Cicero has discussed the problem of knowl-
edge at some length, but in this connection he no-
where mentions Pyrrho, nor does he seem to be
aware that he was a sceptic. It may be argued that
Cicero was not a man of wide reading and got his
information at second hand, but this, if true, would
imply that the compilers of the handbooks which
Cicero certainly consulted were equally silent upon
the point of Pyrrho's scepticism. They must have
regarded him, as Cicero does, in the light of a dog-
matic moralist. These facts would seem to justify
the conclusion that in Pyrrho's teaching the sceptical
element was not much developed, fie may have
learned from Anaxarchus the Democritean tenet that
knowledge obtained through the senses is untrust-
worthy; he may have developed empirically this one
side of Democritean teaching, while rejecting alto-
gether the other side, namely, the assumption of
atoms and void as sole realities, an assumption
reached through the intellect alone and not through
sense. Pyrrho was chiefly concerned to combat per-
ceptions of sense. This he did empirically without
the aid of dialectic. He was pre-eminently an ethical
teacher; he based ethics, as Democritus had done, on
quietism or calm retirement from the world. His aim
was to realise that tranquil repose whereby the soul
lives calmly and steadily, undisturbed by superstition,
1
Cicero, Acad. Pr., II, 130 ; De Fin., IV, 43, 49-
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 317
fear, or any other emotion. The systematic form
given to his teaching by Aristocles is perhaps to be
ascribed to subsequent developments. Certain it is
that the later Sceptics ranged themselves under his
banner and gloried in the name of Pyrrhoneans,
while they looked askance at, if they did not actually
disown, the New Academy with which we have next
to deal.
The school which Plato founded in the Academyhad many vicissitudes of fortune in its long and
romantic history. For some seventy years after
Plato's death the heads of that school were dogma-
tists who by degrees came to concentrate their atten-
tion upon ethics. The school at this period is known
as the Old Academy. Under Arcesilas of Pitane, in
Mysia, who died in 241 B. C, a great change was
made. He retained dialectic, the method of oral
instruction instituted by Plato, but broke with the
traditions of his predecessors by treating every prop-
osition as an open question. In his own lectures
he laid down no definite views, but refuted those of
other philosophers and trained his pupils in arguing
indifferently for and against any given thesis. The
Stoics were the opponents with whom he came chiefly
into collision, and the controversy turned on the ques-
tion whether knowledge could be attained through
the senses by the Stoic criterion. This, as we have
seen, was an apprehensive presentation which, on
their view, guaranteed its own truth and the reality
of its object by the conviction ofimmediate certainty.
Arcesilas himself admitted no standard of truth, but
he was willing to meet the Stoics on their own ground
and refute them from their own premisses. The
certain apprehension for which they contended con-
sists in the assent of the mind to the peculiar kind
318 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of presentation called apprehensive. This appre-
hension of certainty was, they declared, not peculiar
to the wise man whose every intellectual act is knowl-
edge, but is also to be found in the great majority
of unwise mankind with whom, however, it takes
the form of opinion. Arcesilas fastened on this as
an inconsistency. Apprehension of objective reality
must, he affirmed, be either scientific knowledge in
the sage or mere opinion in the unwise. On Stoic
principles, he contended, there is no room for any
intermediate state of mind in which both classes of
men share. This amounts to calling simple appre-
hension a logical abstraction; so much the Stoics
might safely concede. But their opponent went fur-
ther. First he challenged the possibility of giving
assent to a presentation; he argued that the object of
assent was a proposition, not a perception. It is not
sensations we approve but judgments of the reason.
Arcesilas next appealed to reason. He denied that
there was such a thing as a perception which in Stoic
phrase apprehends objective reality. By various ar-
guments he endeavoured to show that none of our
perceptions possess this guarantee of their own truth,
for the same certainty of conviction might accompany
a false perception. If, then, we can never be sure
that a presentation is true, we can never be sure that
by assenting to it we are apprehending objective
reality and are forced to conclude that the world
of real objects remains incognisable. From this con-
clusion necessarily followed suspense of judgment,
and in his controversy with the Stoics Arcesilas could
enforce this by an argumentum ad hominem. The
Stoics, as we have seen, did not uphold all affirma-
tions of the senses, but laid down conditions which
must be fulfilled before the evidence of the senses
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 319
could be accepted. If these conditions were not
satisfied, the Stoic sage had no option; he must per-
force withhold assent. For, ifhe yields assent with-
out sufficient evidence, he descends from the high
ground of scientific knowledge to mere fallible
opinion, often shown by subsequent experience to be
erroneous. Arcesilas with much ingenuity readily
adopted the Stoic tenet that the sage will never opine.
He trusted to his dialectical skill to convince his
opponents that, as they would never be in a position
to do aught else but opine, they must, if consistent,
fallback into hisown attitudeofsuspended judgment.
1
Cicero sums up the controversy between the dog-
matist and the sceptic as follows: "It appears to
Arcesilas possible to refrain from opining, and not
only possible but indispensable that the sage should
do so. Such behaviourwas quite in keeping with the
character of the sage. Very likely he asked Zeno
what would happen if it were neither possible for the
wise man to apprehend with certainty, nor becoming
in him to opine. Zeno, I dare say, replied that the
wise man would not opine because there was an
object capable of being known and apprehended.
What, pray, was that object ? A presentation, to be
sure. Of what sort, then ? Zeno, I imagine, gave
his definition as follows: 'A presentation impressed,
stamped, and engraven upon the mind, a presentation
which comes from a real object and represents that
object as it is/ And did this hold, was the rejoinder,
even if a true presentation were indistinguishable
from a false one ? This question brought home to a
man of Zeno's shrewdness that if a presentation of a
real object was indistinguishable from that of an
unreal object, it was impossible for any presentation
1
Sextus Emp., Adv. Math.9 VII, 153 sqq.
320 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
to be apprehended and known. Arcesilas made no
objection to his adding to the definition the qualifying
clause 'such as could not come from an unreal object/
We cannot know what is false : neither can we know
what is true if the true is everywhere indistinguish-
able from the false. He threw his whole energies
into the task of proving that there is no presentation
of a real object that is not indistinguishable from a
false presentation of an unreal object."
*
In Arcesilas we seem to discern a somewhat dif-
ferent phase of scepticism from that of Phyrro, and
this impression is confirmed by the fact that Arcesilas
was one of the philosophers whom Pyrrho's pupil
Timon satirised in the Silli, There he is described
as a sort of chimera or fabulous creature of triple
form:
Plato the head of him; Pyrrho the tail; midway
Diodorus.2
Pyrrho had combated popular opinions, popular
customs, and popular beliefs on empirical grounds.
Arcesilas, a learned philosopher, combated a scien-
1
Cicero, Acad. Pr. t II, 77.
2
Diogenes Laertius, IV, 35. The line is a parody of Homer, Iliad, VI,
181, where the Chimera is said to be "in front a lion and behind a ser-
pent and in the midst a goat." Diodorus Cronus of lasus in Caria,
one of the last adherents of the Megarian school, was a pupil of Apol-
lonius, himself a pupil of Eubulides. Like the other Megarian philos-
ophers, he was an acute dialectician and the inventor of sophistical
puzzles on the impossibility of motion and change, which have come
down to us. The surname Cronus, which was also borne by his teacher
Apollonius, alludes to his argumentative skill; "crooked-counselling
Cronus" is a stock epithet in Homer. There is no evidence that Ar-
cesilas had ever been ostensibly a pupil of Diodorus any more than of
Pyrrho. He had been a disciple of Theophrastus until Grantor gained
him for the Academy. But the later Megarians had a great reputation,
and their sophistical puzzles enjoyed wide popularity. Arcesilas, we
may be sure, would not fail to profit by the example of such masters in
the art of polemical controversy. Cf. p, 325.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 321
tific system and an infallible criterion by means of
dialectic. A consideration of the contradictions in
our ordinary perceptions and notions led Pyrrho to
deny that there could be any truth in them. Arcesilas
was not concerned to deny that conceivably our per-
ceptions might contain the truth, but to maintain that
any truth they might conceivably contain could not
be known by us. Hence there is nothing in Pyrrho*s
position inconsistent with the search after truth.
Like Socrates, he has been foiled hitherto, but he
can invite us again and again to renew the search
and set out on the investigation of opinions. Arcesi-
las is not in a position to search for truth. We may
even already possess it, but at any rate we cannot
distinguish it with any certainty from error. He is
not stating a fact but settling a question of principle.
The Pyrrnoneans report that truth has not yet been
found, but they are willing to seek it. Arcesilas
believes that not only is truth not yet found but that it
is impossible to find it, true presentations being in-
distinguishable from false. Arcesilas left nothing in
writing, and we really know very little of his views.
But it would seem that even in the region of practice
he diverged altogether from Pyrrho. So far from
recommending men to be insensible to their environ-
ment and to regard all objects with indifference,
Arcesilas fell back upon opinion, which he main-
tained to be a sufficient guide for action. There was
no need to wait for absolute knowledge; a reasonable
probability was adequate. For, if happiness was the
end, the degree to which this end was realised could
be measured by the successful result of our conduct,
whether absolute knowledge or mere opinion, whether
certainty or probability formed the basis of that
conduct.
322 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
A century later Carneades of Cyrene (213-129
B. C.) won the admiration of his contemporaries and
of succeeding generations by his commanding elo-
quence and genius for polemical controversy. Like
Socrates, Pyrrho, and Arcesilas, he himself left noth-
ing in writing, but the results of his inquiries were
transmitted to posterity by the industry of his favour-
ite pupil Clitomachus,the authorofsome fourhundred
treatises. When Carneades became the head of the
Academy he soon restored its reputation, which had
suffered since the death of Arcesilas. Before this he
had learned the Stoic logic under Diogenes the Baby-
lonian, the successor of Chrysippus, and he made the
writings ofChrysippus himself his chief philosophical
study. Throughout his career he acknowledged his
obligations to that master of acute and subtle argu-
ment whose constructive work it was the task of his
lifetime to overthrow. "But for Chrysippus, where
should I have been?" was his parody of the current
saying, "But for Chrysippus, where had been the
Porch ?" Later Stoics, on the other hand, professed
to discover a design of Providence in the fact that
Chrysippus lived midway between Arcesilas and
Carneades; according to them Chrysippus not only
repelled the attacks already made, but demolished
by anticipation the arguments of the yet more formi-
dable assailant who was to follow. The personal
influence ofCarneades was as remarkable as his skill
in controversy. Such was the charm he exercised
that some of his rivals quitted their own class-rooms
to attend his lectures. The force of his polemic may
be measured by the modifications and innovations
which, for a time at least, it was fashionable to in-
troduce into Stoicism in order to meet his criticisms.
Unquestionably he was the greatest philosopher of
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 323
Greece in the four centuries from Chrysippus to
Plotinus; indeed, in ability and depth of thought
he surpassed Chrysippus. Plato's transcendent ge-
nius overshadowed all his successors, but in the
illustrious roll of his disciples Carneades is not un-
worthy of a place beside Aristotle and Plotinus.
It was, however, on the negative and destructive
not the positive and constructive side that he as-
similated the spirit and method of Plato. With the
ideal theory and with Plato's sanguine hope of re-
generating mankind the apostle of agnosticism had
nothing iw common. Scepticism with him had a
wider range and a higher aim than with his prede-
cessors. His task was twofold, to refute all existing
dogmas and to evolve a theory of probability which
might serve as a basis for action. This last is the
more original contribution, although, as we shall see,
it ultimately led to the abandonment of the sceptical
position.
We have first, then, to summarise the negative and
destructive criticismwhich Carneades directed against
the epistemology, the ethics, the teleology, and natu-
ral theology of contemporary schools and primarily
of the Stoics. If certainty is attainable, as the dog-
matists hold, there must be a standard or criterion,
whether it be reason or the senses or an infallible pres-
entation, by which we can discriminate truth from
falsehood. In denying the possibility of any such
standard of truth Carneades restated and reinforced
the general argument of Arcesilas. There could be
no such standard for sense-perception since pres-
entations or impressions of sense were frequently
found to be deceptive. This consequence is inevit-
able so long as we adhere to the Stoic doctrine ofwhat
presentation to sense really is, namely, a modification
324 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
or change in the soul which furnishes information,
not merely about itself, but about the external object
which caused it. For this external cause is known by
its effects alone, and wherever these conflict we have
no means, so far as present sensation is concerned,
of deciding which of them are true and which of
them are false. Certainty of conviction, if the Stoics
make this their criterion, attaches to presentations
which are afterward discovered to be false. It is not,
then, in the nature of presentation as such, but only
in the true presentation that a standard can be
sought.
Carneades then proceeded to state that (i) there
are false presentations; (2) such false presentations
may pass for true; (3) if two presentations pre-
sent no distinguishing marks, they cannot be re-
garded, the one as true, the other as false; (4) there
is no presentation by the side of which cannot be
placed a false presentation, which is, notwithstanding,
indistinguishable from the true. The first proposi-
tion was never disputed except by Epicurus; the
third was allowed on all hands. It was on the
second and fourth propositions that the stress of
controversy turned. Carneades and Clitomachus ex-
pended their whole ingenuity in proving them, de-
fining and analysing with wearisome minuteness, and
pressing into their service the abnormal phenomena
which are always in favour when psychology is in
an imperfect state. In dreams and trances we are
moved by unreal presentations as powerfully as if
they were true. Sane men may be subject to hal-
lucinations and mad men are the prey of delusions.
But if impressions of sense are fallible, it is in vain to
look to the understanding for a remedy since general
notions, on the Stoic view, are based on experience.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 325
They are elaborated from sense-impressions and re-
quire constantly to be verified by reference to sense.
Moreover, it has been the work of logic to develop
and work out a system of notions and concepts, and
yet logic is honeycombed with fallacies and sophistical
problems for which no solution can be found even by
Chrysippus. Such were the Mentiens or Liar, the
Electra and similar puzzles which the ingenuity ofthe
Megarian sect excogitated to disturb the repose of
unwary reasoners in all ages.
1
Such was also that
favourite but dangerous instrument of Chrysippus,
the Sorites, or chain-argument, which showed how
hard it was to define and draw exact limits, in
quantitative distinctions especially, for, when asked
whether three are few or many, even he borrowed a
weapon from the armoury of the Sceptics by sus-
pension of judgment and refusal to answer. In
addition there was the contradiction inherent in the
very nature of knowledge which the Sophists exposed
when they asked how learning was possible, since
some previous acquaintance with the thing to be
learned was presupposed.
But Carneades was not content with a formal
denial that knowledge was possible. An abstract
proposition of this kind could never carry much
1 E. g. some one (let us hope a Cretan) says: "Iam telling a lie." Is
this proposition true or false? Logicians are asked to decide. This is
the problem called The Liar. Again, Orestes disguised meets his sister
Electra. Does she or does she not know her brother? This is the
Electra. Six of these fallacies or sophistical puzzles are ascribed to the
Megarian Eubulides, Diog. Lae'rt, II, 108, but some of them at least
were current before his time. They are: (i) The Mentiens or Liar;
(2) the person disguised or hidden under a veil; (3) Electra (a variety
of the last); (4) Sorites, "How many grains make a heap?" (5) Cor-
nutus, some one asks: "Have you shed your horns?" a categorical
answer Yes or No being required; (6) The Bald Man (a variety of the
Sorites). Cf, Grote, Plato, III, 482-490.
326 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
weight. Students of the sciences pursue their re-
searches unremittingly and derive satisfaction from
watching the continuous growth of their acquisitions,
even if they are sensible that as the circle of knowl-
edge widens its circumference also widens and the
margin where the known abuts upon the unknown
must, in consequence, be always growing greater.
Carneades felt it incumbent upon him to examine the
results of all previous investigations and to demon-
strate their worthlessness. If the scientific method
of his time was, as he contended, unsound, its con-
clusions must be invalid and it was his business to
show this in detail. Here again, as in the formal
theory of knowledge, his chief adversaries were the
Stoics. Their most notable achievement, their ethi-
cal system, afforded many opportunities for attack.
It was inconsistent, he argued, to refuse the name of
good to the objects ofnatural desire, while at the same
time maintaining virtue to be nothing but an activity
directed to the choice of them. It is said that his
polemic on this point led Antipater and other heads
ofthe school to modify the traditional formula for the
end of action. For some time, in what is called the
middle period of Stoicism, the attempt was made to
bring the objects of natural desire into closer relation
to morality, the end being defined as doing all things
for the sake of obtaining the primary objects of
natural desire. Cicero affirms that whereas the ear-
lier Stoics had declared reputation, especially post-
humous fame, to be a thing absolutely indifferent, the
vigorous onslaughts of Carneades forced their suc-
cessors to concede it a place among things preferred.
But if the science of the Stoics was subordinate to
their ethics they nevertheless declared it to be a self-
contained system impregnable to attack. It culmi-
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 327
nated in the teleological theory of the universe, the
doctrine of the existence and nature of God, and his
providential care for man, of which the divinely
ordered course of events, including the means of
prophecy and divination, was the outcome. Fortu-
nately the ample materials preserved by Cicero
1
and
by Sextus Empiricus
2
enable us to reproduce, with
tolerable accuracy, the Academic criticism of these
doctrines. Cicero's spokesman in the dialogue on
the nature of the gods first examines the evidence
adduced by the Stoics for the divine existence. They
had appealed, like Epicurus, to the consensus gen-
tium, the universal belief that gods exist. If, replied
their opponent, the belief is universal and necessary,
it is worse than useless to attempt to rest it upon
argument, which simply raises doubts as to the
validity of the belief. But is there such an universal
belief? It was easy to reply that, in the sense re-
quired by the argument, it neither was nor could be
universal. The sight of the starry heavens may
strike multitudes, even Kant himself, with awe, but
it failed to convince the Epicureans that nature or the
universe is a living, rational being. On the con-
trary, they denied that either the stars or the universe
have life. Besides, urges Carneades, it is strange to
commit the question to the judgment of the ignorant
multitude, when the Stoics tell us that the majority
ofmankind are fools. As to the alleged appearances
of the gods in human form to men of old, the Aca-
demic asks for evidence, and until this is forthcoming
he dismisses them as rumours and old wives' fables.
Then again the Stoics appealed to divination and
the manner in which portents and prophecies came
true. To this the reply is that, if all is foreordained,
1
Cicero, De Nat. Deor., Ill, a Sextus Emp., Adv. Math., IX.
328 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
the knowledge of futurity is not advantageous, but
harmful to men, while the mistakes of diviners throw
discredit on the whole art of divination. If it were
really an art, it would rest on rational principles,
like the art ofmedicine, but, as practised in antiquity,
divination was merely a matter of routine and tradi-
tion. The belief in the gods, no doubt, arose in part
from awe-inspiring natural phenomena.
This proposition Carneades was as little inclined
to dispute as Epicurus, but he is careful to point out
that the question of the origin, as distinct from the
validity, of the belief is irrelevant. For what are the
Stoics concerned to prove ? Is it that men believe in
the gods or is it that the gods really exist ? If the
former, their argument is sound; if the latter, it is
worthless. Zeno, in treating of the divine nature,
had reasoned thus: What is rational is more excel-
lent than what is irrational. Nothing is more excel-
lent than the universe, therefore the universe is
rational and exercises reason. Here, as the Aca-
demic points out, there is an ambiguity in the term
"excellent." The universe may be beautiful, it may
be adapted to our convenience, and hence we may
pronounce it excellent. But this is no ground for
declaring it to be wise or to exercise reason. Before
that can be inferred it must be proved to be animate,
otherwise there is just as much ground for inferring
that the city ofRome, or the universe itself, is musical,
mathematical, or philosophical. Nor can the regu-
larity of the celestial movements prove the divinity
of the stars, for there are certain terrestrial phenom-
ena, such as the tides, the tertian and quartan fevers,
which are also regular in their recurrence. Are they,
therefore, divine? Chrysippus, again, had argued
that what man is not able to produce must have been
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 329
produced by a higher being, z. *., by deity. But this
inference is open to the same objection, namely, that
by the term "higher" two different points ofview are
confounded. There may, indeed, be a being higher
than man, but why must this being be rational and
man-like ? Why not nature herself ? What grounds
are there for an anthropomorphic conception of
nature ? Nor is there any more force in another
argument of Chrysippus. The sight of a beautiful
house, he says, suggests the idea of the owner for
whom it was built. As every house was destined to
be inhabited, the universe must be intended for the
habitation of God. If the universe were a house,
is the rejoinder, it might be so, but the very point at
issue is whether the universe is a house or not, whether
it has been constructed for a definite purpose, or
whether it is simply an undesigned result of natu-
ral forces. Socrates had asked: Whence comes the
rational soul ofman if there is not a rational soul in
the universe ? If there is not, Carneades replies, the
human mind and its faculties are merely spontaneous
products of nature acting according to her own laws.
Again, Chrysippus had insisted
*
on the organic unity
of the world and the correlation and mutual inter-
dependence of all its parts. Suppose this granted,
there would still be no reason to accept his infer-
ence that the cause of all this harmony is a divine
spirit or Pneuma which permeates and gives life to
all things and connects them together in one organic
whole. For the coherence and permanence ofnature
may be due to natural forces and not to the gods.
It will be seen from the foregoing that Carneades
assailed the real cardinal dogmas of Stoic theology.
It was not for him to call in question the existence
1
Cicero, De Nat. Deor., II, 19.
330 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of the gods, but to criticise the belief in an eternal
world-soul or universal reason and the doctrine of
providence. The attitude of the critic must not be
misunderstood. He was a pure agnostic. Osten-
sibly he put forward no positive view; his object is
merely to show that the Stoic conceptions were un-
tenable; that in attempting to define the nature ofthe
gods they merely succeeded in proving their non-exist-
ence. The attributes assigned to the Stoic deity were
contradictory, and the critic proved this from Stoic
premisses, but, as we shall see, this acute thinker
used arguments which go much further than this
and bring to light the fundamental difficulties in
any conception of God, whether He be conceived as
personal or impersonal, finite or infinite, or veiled
under some abstraction as the absolute or the un-
conditioned. In the audacity of his excursion into
this region of thought Carneades has never been
surpassed. Hume and Mansel do but restate his
arguments adapted to modern conditions.
1
In the
ordinary view, if not by the Stoics, God is regarded
as at once an infinite and an individual being. But
we cannot, it is said, apply to Him the characteristics
of personal existence without limiting His nature.
Carneades, as we learn from Sextus,
2
started by
proving what the Stoics never denied, that God is an
animate being, since what is animate is better than
what is inanimate. From this he develops the logical
consequences implied in our conception of such a
being and derived wholly from experience. An ani-
mate being is body possessed of soul, and within our
experience every animal possesses sensation. The
1
Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion; Mansel, Bampton
Lectures on the Limits of Religious Thought, esp. Lect. VII; Cf. Sextus
Emp., IX, 152-181.
* Sextus Emp., /. c., IX, 152.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 331
body of an animal must be either simple or com-
posite, z. e. 9 it must consist of a single element or be
a compound of several elements. Of the first al-
ternative we have no experience, while in composite
bodies, just because each element tends to fly apart
to its proper sphere, decomposition is inevitable.
Whatever, then, is corporeal is discerptible and there-
fore perishable. Body, as we know it, is everywhere
liable to disintegration; none being indivisible, all
bodies must be dissoluble and liable to be broken up
into their component parts. Again, whatever is com-
posed of changing elements is itself liable to change
and therefore perishable; therefore all animals are
mortal. We have seen how the Stoics, following
Heraclitus, met these objections, affirming the present
order of the universe to be perishable while its sub-
stance remains eternal. But the Stoic deity, though
corporeal, is endowed with life and soul. The suc-
ceeding arguments turn on these attributes. What-
ever is animate is capable of feeling and susceptible
to external impressions, and therefore liable to de-
struction, for if it is susceptible to impressions it
must be affected by them and suffer from them. If
it suffers from them it must be liable to disruption
and disintegration, and therefore perishable. Again,
every animate being, if capable of feeling, is sus-
ceptible of pleasure and pain, but whatever experi-
ences pain is also mortal. These objections assume
the Stoic theory of sensation, a presentation as de-
fined by Chrysippus being nothing more than a
modification or change in the soul, and sensation
without the feeling of pleasure or pain being incon-
ceivable. But whatever is liable to change is liable
to deterioration, and whatever is liable to pain, which
is caused by deterioration, is liable to suffer, to be
332 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
disintegrated and destroyed. Again, the Stoics taught
that every animal has an instinctive desire for what
is in harmony with its nature, an instincitve dislike
of what is contrary to its nature. But whatever is
contrary to the nature of a being is destructive of its
life Moreover, the very things which normally pro-
duce sensation,things hotand cold, pleasant and pain-
ful, are, when in excess, destructive to life. Hence
everything that lives is exposed to annihilation.
Some of the foregoing arguments, it may be noted,
are equally applicable to the Epicurean gods. Against
the Heraclitean and Stoic identification of deity with
warm breath or fiery ether, the following objection
was taken: There is no reason to suppose that fire
is more akin to divinity than the other elements.
It is not more essential to life than they are; if it is
the cause of feeling in man, it must, on Stoic grounds
itself, be susceptible of feeling and therefore liable
to destruction; moreover, fire is not self-existent but
needs fuel for its support.
But God, to the Stoics, is a rational being endowed
with all excellence. It is easy to show that virtue,
as we understand it, is incompatible with this idea
of the divine nature. Every virtue supposes an im-
perfection, in overcoming which it consists. To be
brave, a man must be exposed to danger; to be
magnanimous, he must be exposed to misfortunes.
To be temperate, he must resist pleasure; to display
endurance, he must conquer pain. Take the four
cardinal virtues in detail. Shall we attribute to God
wisdom, which consists in a knowledge of good and
evil and of things morally indifferent ? What need
has a being in whom there is not and cannot be any
evil to discriminate between good and evil ? And
what need has he of reason or apprehension, which
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 333
we employ for the purpose of obtaining by means of
the evident a knowledge of the obscure, whereas to
God nothing can be obscure ? As for justice, the
virtue which assigns to each his due, how is it ap-
propriate to the gods ? For it was the product, the
Stoics maintain, ofhuman fellowship and association.
Temperance consists in foregoing sensual pleasures;
but is this a virtue compatible with the divine nature ?
And how can God be conceived of as brave ? Is he
so in respect to pain or labour or danger, not one of
which things affects him ? And yet, if these four
virtues are excluded, how can we conceive of a God
who exercises neither reason nor virtue.
1
Or how
conceive of a being in perpetual bliss who is capable
of feeling pleasure but incapable of feeling pain ?
Pleasure can only be known by contrast with pain,
and the possibility of heightening and augmenting
life always supposes the possibility of lowering and
diminishing it. Nor is it otherwise with the intelli-
gence displayed in the adaptation ofmeans to an end.
He alone is thus intelligent who always discovers
what will subserve his purpose. If, however, he
must discover it, it cannot have been previously
known to him. Hence this intelligence can only
belong to a beingwho is ignorant about much. Such
a being, then, has his limitations. He can never feel
sure whether sooner or later something will not cause
his ruin. He will therefore be exposed to fear. A
being susceptible of pleasure and exposed to pain, a
being who has to contend with dangers and diffi-
culties, and who feels pain and fear, must inevitably,
so thought Carneades, be finite and destructible. If,
therefore, we cannot conceive of God, except in this
form, we cannot conceive ofhim at all.
1
Cicero, De Nat. Deor., Ill, 38 sqq.
334 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Nor do the difficulties diminish when we pass from
the divine nature to divine providence, the second
cardinal dogma of Stoic theology. As we have seen,
their world-soul or immanent reason works by final
causes and ordains all events for the good of the
several parts and especially for the benefit and wel-
fare ofthe rational creature man. In support of this
belief the Stoics pointed to evident marks of adapta-
tion and design. Carneades could easily show that
the evidence was inconclusive. Whence, he asks, so
many pernicious and destructive agencies on land
and sea ? Why, for instance, if the world was made
for the safety ofman, were poisonous snakes created ?
But, it may be urged, man is, after all, a rational
being, and God's providential care is manifest in the
bestowal of this supreme endowment. Carneades
rejoined boldly that the gift of reason is rather an
injury than a benefit. Experience shows that the
great majority ofmankind only use it to make them-
selves worse than brutes. So far, then, as they
are concerned, what becomes of divine providence ?
Again, right reason alone is beneficial to its possessor,
and right reason is so rare that it cannot be derived
from God, who would never have been guilty of
partiality in his dealings with men. The objection
is not met by the rejoinder that these evils arise from
man's abuse of reason. The deity must have fore-
seen that the bare gift of reason was liable to abuse
and that such abuse could only be prevented by mak-
ing reason infallible.
Pressing still further the inconsistency between the
two Stoic doctrines of divine providence and univer-
sal folly and depravity, Carneades asks: How can
it be said that man is the especial favourite of
Heaven if it be true that lack of wisdom is the great-
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 335
est of all evils and that all men lack wisdom ? If
God really cared for men, he ought to have made all
men good or at least to have rewarded the righteous
and punished the wicked. Suffering virtue and tri-
umphant vice is inconsistentwith anyscheme ofmoral
government. To maintain that piety is regularly re-
warded and impiety regularly punished is to shut our
eyes to the numerous negative instances, and even
such imperfect retribution as we may then discover
in this world is the natural result of human agency.
Intentional neglect is a great fault in a human ruler,
and in a divine ruler there can be no such thing as
unintentional neglect. The special pleading ofChry-
sippus meets with little mercy. When, adapting the
legal maxim de minimis non curat lex, he urged that
minora dei neglegunt the replywas that life and liberty
are not minora. To the Stoic, it is true, all external
things are minima in comparison with virtue; but
then it is just these external things which are at the
disposal of Heaven. Virtue the Stoic sage must win
for himself; it is the one thing which is always in
his own power. Consequently it is himself, not God,
that he credits with it. If it be argued that vice is
punished in the descendants of the guilty person,
what shouldwe say to such justice in a human ruler ?
Moreover,how can God punish if He be incapable of
anger ? IfHis power is not equally exerted inhelping
the good, it must be thatHe lacks either the will or the
knowledge to do this. If His care does not extend to
individuals, what reason is there for believing that it
extends to nations or to humanity at large? The
practice of divination, however, implies a particular
supervision extending to the minutest details of each
inidivdual's life.
To return, however, to the main problem. We
336 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
have seen the reasoning by which Carneades en-
deavoured to prove that neither of the contradictory
attributes, destructible or indestructible (or, in other
words, mortal and immortal), can properly be ap-
plied to God. How stands the case if the question
be raised, Is He finite or infinite ? or the further
question, Is He"corporeal or incorporeal ?
*
If a thing
exists, it is either finite of infinite. God is not in-
finite, for then He would be immovable and inani-
mate. For if that which is infinite moves it must
move through space; it must move from place to
place, and therefore be in place, and being in place
it is limited or finite. If, then, there is anything
infinite, it does not move, or, if anything moves, it is
not infinite. And similarly that which is infinite is
inanimate or without soul. For if permeated by a
soul, this soul holds it together from centre to cir-
cumference and from circumference to centre. But
that which is infinite has neither centre nor circum-
ference. Hence that which is infinite is inanimate.
But we ordinarily think ofGod both as moving and
as endowed with soul. It follows, then, that God is
not infinite. But neither is He finite, for that which
is finite is part ofthat which is infinite, and, since the
whole is superior to the part, the infinite is superior
to the finite. But it is absurd that anything should
be superior to God or to the divine nature. Again,
if a thing exists, it is either corporeal or incorporeal.
God is not incorporeal, since thatwhich is incorporeal
is inanimate, devoid of life and sensation and inca-
pable of activity. Nor, again, is He corporeal, since
all that is corporeal is liable to change, and therefore
destructible, whereas, that which is divine is held to
1
Sextus Emp., Adv. Math., IX, 148-151, 180, 181; cf. Cicero, De
Nat. Dear., Ill, 29-34.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 337
be indestructible. Or otherwise thus, ifGod is cor-
poreal, He is either a compound of simple elements
or consists of a single simple element. If a com-
pound, He is destructible, for every formation result-
ing from the union of elements must be destroyed by
the dissolution of those elements. But if He is a
single elementary body, whether fire, air, water, or
earth, He is without life and without reason, which is
absurd. It appears, then, that neither of the con-
tradictory attributes can be predicated of the subject,
neither infinite nor finite, neither corporeal nor in-
corporeal. The conclusion is that there can be no
subject for predication. All the forms under which
we think ofGod being impossible, His existence can-
not be asserted.
Here we may be allowed to pause and offer a few
remarks upon this vigorous polemic. First, it is
curious to observe how far Carneades has anticipated
much of subsequent metaphysic; his reasoned ob-
jections when translated into English run almost
insensibly into modern philosophical language. The
argument from design, as it is commonly called, goes
back to Socrates; even before the Stoics took it up
it had been so clearly stated by Xenophon, Plato, and
Aristotle that it is no wonder Carneades felt it in-
cumbent upon him to criticise it. In doing this he
placed himself at the level of his opponents. He
shared their imperfections; he was no better able
than they were to detect the errors in the popular
science of the day. Nor had he either the capacity
or the inclination to undertake physical research.
Many of his objections are little better than fallacies
of a transparent kind. He saw more acutely than
the Stoics the difficulties of the problem, and secured
many a dialectical triumph by pointing to the ab-
338 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
surdities in the details of their anthropomorphic
scheme. But his method of criticism necessarily im-
plied that, at least provisionally, he accepted the
anthropomorphic conception himself. The deity he
rejects is, after all, only a magnified and non-natural
man with more than a man's might and much of a
man's caprice. With him, as with the Stoics, the
divine differs from the human in degree, not in kind.
He never rises above this conception and hence falls
far short, not only of Plato's ideal ofabsolute perfec-
tion, but even ofAristotle's transcendent First Cause.
The Greek intellect had already made great strides
toward a purer conception of deity from the age when
Xenophanes denounced Homer and Hesiod together
with the whole fabric oflying legends and polytheistic
immoralities down to the time when Aris.totle re-
alised the impossibility of ascribing human virtues
to God, and carefully eliminated as many attributes
as possible from his First Cause. Carneades, it
would seem, failed utterly to appreciate this advance.
He appears not to have comprehended even the
higher side of pantheism, the doctrine of a spirit of
law and order working in the world, apostrophised
by Cleanthes as "Nature's great king, who by thy
just decree controllest all." Otherwise he would
never have supposed that he had answered the Stoics
when he proposed to substitute Nature for God.
In comparison with the gross confusion of God and
matter which degraded the divine without raising the
material, his dim perception of a natural growth
apart from any divine providence is attractive, we
may even say lofty. But for the most part it was the
lower side of Stoic pantheism that he chose to attack,
and his ingenious syllogisms enabled him to score a
series of fruitless argumentative victories.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 339
To give some further details. It is objected that
God cannot possess virtue because virtue is above its
possessor and there can be nothing above God.
1
This objection, resting as it does on a confusion ofthe
abstract with the concrete, can hardly have been
meant to be taken seriously, for in arguing against
the Stoic deification of abstractions Carneades is
careful to point out that the virtues are but qualities
of the human agents in whom they reside. So,
again, the anthropomorphic conception suggests the
inquiry whether speech and language can be ascribed
to the deity.
3
To deny this attribute was opposed to
the general belief; to affirm it can be shown to lead
to the grossest absurdities. Speech, aswe understand
it, implies the possession of vocal organs, and we are
straightway landed in the cruder anthropomorphic
details of Epicurean theology. The use of speech
implies conversation, and the language employed
must be that of some particular nation, either Greek
or a foreign tongue. IfGreek itmust be some partic-
ular dialect, Attic or -ZEolic or some other. Butwhy
should a preference be given to one dialect over
another? Moreover, if the language employed be
Greek, a foreign tongue would have to be acquired
presumably by instruction. Every one of these sup-
positions teems with absurdities. Once moire, Car-
neades was not less concerned to attack than his
opponents to defend the ordinary polytheism. As
we have seen, the Stoics regarded the many gods of
the popular faith as manifestations of one supreme
power. In any case, polytheism was a witness to the
universal belief and was entitled to respect in so far
as it rested upon usage and tradition, and formed part
1
Sextus Emp., Adv. Math., IX, 176.
* Sextus Emp,, /. c., IX, 178; Cicero, De Nat. Deor.
340 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of the established social order. The method of at-
tack chosen was by sorites or chain-syllogisms which,
as we are informed, were greatly admired and often
quoted by Clitomachus.
1
Here are some specimens.
If Zeus be a god, his brother Poseidon is a god; if
Poseidon, Achelous; if Achelous, the Nile; if the
Nile, any river; if any river, then any mountain tor-
rent. But mountain torrents are not gods; then
neither is Zeus a god. Again, if the sun is a god,
then his appearance above the horizon, which we call
day, is a god; if the day, the month; if the month,
the year, which is a series of months; and similarly
with morning, noon, evening, and other parts of
time. But the year is not a god, then neither is the
sun a god. Obviously, then, the popular beliefhas no
distinctive mark by which to separate the divine from
that which is not divine. It is refuted when the essen-
tial dissimilarity between the two is established. It is
characteristic of the sceptical Academy that in spite
of this trenchant criticism Carneades never openly
brokewith thepopulartheology asEpicurus had done.
There is no reason to doubt that he accepted the be-
lief in the gods as an opinion more or less probable
and useful for practical purposes. He claimed the
Sceptic's privilege of abstaining from pronouncing a
decided opinion for or against it. He neither, like
Plato, cherished the kernel of truth disguised but not
wholly concealed under mythology, nor like Zeno did
he attempt to allegorise and rationalise it as perman-
ently valuable from its old associations and present
influence. He as far as possible disregarded it, ex-
cept where he was concerned for controversial pur-
poses to refute the Stoic system of interpretation of
the myths by personification of material elements.
1
Sextus Emp., Adv. Math., IX, 182 sqq.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 341
So much for the negative and destructive criticism
on which the fame of Carneades chiefly rests. But
when he passed from theory to practice, the positive
side of his teaching was no less remarkable. It was
designed to meet the reproach which in all ages the
dogmatists have levelled at their opponents, namely,
that the convinced sceptic, if consistent, is reduced
to inaction. If the moment we examine any im-
pression of sense we find that the arguments for its
trustworthiness or untrustworthiness exactly balance
each other, what grounds are there for action ? Why
give the preference to any one ofour impressions over
another, and by acting upon it abandon the only
safeguard against error, suspension of judgment?
Pyrrho's quietism or absolute insensibility to environ-
ment seemed justified bysuch considerations,buteven
Pyrrhonists, perceiving the absurdity of carrying it to
all lengths, since complete inactivitywouldmeandeath,
permitted men to follow appearances, as itwas called,
and be guided by custom in the various conjunctures
of ordinary life. But could no better basis for action
be found than the compulsion of circumstances; than
habit, instinct, or association ? If the arguments for
and against a particular judgment of sense exactly
balanced each other, suspension of judgment would
be the right attitude. But experience shows that as
a rule the scales do incline decisively in one direction
or the other. Thus probable judgments are formed,
and though certainty is unattainable their probability
admits of varying degrees. In order to introduce
and establish such a calculus of probability it was
necessary to make a new classification of presenta-
tions; in other words, of impressions and ideas.
1
1
Sextus Emp., Adv. Math., VII, 166-189 (the most accurate account);
Cicero, Acad. Pr. } II, 64-146, more especially 98-11.
342 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
A presentation as defined by the Stoics was (i) a
mental change or impression in the subject (2) caused
by an external object. It therefore can be considered
under a double aspect from a twofold point of view.
In relation to the object the presentation is true when
it agrees with the object, false in the contrary case.
But in the absence of a criterion of truth this distinc-
tion leads to no result, and we have already seen how
decisively the Stoic criterion was rejected by Carne-
ades. In relation, however, to the subject who has
the presentationthere is the reallyvaluable distinction
between presentations which appear to him true and
thosewhich appear to him false. The formerwe call
probable, the latter improbable. Being necessarily
ignorant of the relation of ideas to the objects they
represent,we are reduced tojudging them by their re-
lation to ourselves, by the appearance of truthfulness,
the greateror less clearness they have for us. Among
those which appear true there are some which seem
so only in a slight degree; the objectmay be small or
too far off or our senses may be weak and present it
only in a confused manner. Thesemay be dismissed,
as well as all which appear false; we have no use for
them. Others, again, seem very probable the more
we examine them. They may be false, but the
chance of error does not hinder us from according
them our assent; it is by them we regulate our judg-
ment and action. The first condition, then, of ac-
ceptance is that a presentation should be probable in
itself, /. <?., should excite a belief in its own truth
apart from any extraneous support. But presenta-
tions to sense do not occur in isolated fashion; they
form a chain, a connected series. If I see a man I
see him as part of a sensible continuum, I perceive
his figure, height, colour, movement, speech, dress,
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 343
and shoes; I am aware of the air, light, time of day,
sky, earth, and the friends which form the accom-
paniments of his environment. The absence of anyof these accompaniments awaken suspicion of the
presentation. Thus Menelaus, having left a phantomHelen on board ship, cannot believe his eyeswhen he
sees the true Helen at Pharos. The previous false
impression is a hinderance to the acceptance of the
true one. When, on the contrary, all the concomi-
tants are present, this is so far a guarantee of truth.
The second condition, then, ifwe are to assent to the
presentation, is that it should be unimpeached, that
nothing in the series to which it belongs should dis-
tract or hinder us from attending to it. When a
presentation stands in connection with and is con-
firmed by other presentations it reaches this higher
grade of probability, which for most practical pur-
poses is sufficient; in other words, the impression is
confirmed by the agreement of related ideas.
Lastly, there is a third and higher grade by which
we may, if necessary, approximate still more closely
to the certainty which is beyond our reach. The
more important concerns of life require a closer
attention and more than ordinary precaution. We
may consider each of the concurrent presentations
in detail and subjectthem to a severe scrutiny. Thus
we examine the subject which has the presentations
:
Is he in health ? of sound mind ? The medium :
Is the air thick? the distance great? Is the time
or the place suitable ? The ordinary course ofthings
seldom allows of all these precautions being taken.
Suppose you see a coil of rope, which at first sight is
taken for a serpent. The first impulse is to run away.
On second thoughts you return and examine it; it is
motionless. Probably it is not a serpent. But in
344 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
winter all snakes hibernate. Give it a knock with a
stick; if this has no effect you conclude that it is a
coil of rope. Thus the effect of probable conviction
is strengthened by cumulative evidence. Separate
presentations may be false without our being able to
detect the falsehood. All that we can do is to attach
a tolerably accurate value to the "perhaps" since
unconditional "yes" or "no" is beyond the reach
ofour faculties, and the more important the decision
the more accuracy should we endeavour to attain.
Higher and yet higher grades of probability approxi-
mate to certitude as an asymptote to its curve without
ever reaching it. Orwe may put it thus : Carneades,
like a true Sceptic, refuses altogether to make any
assertion about the thing in itself, but having dis-
tinguished the objective point of view from the sub-
jective as clearly as any ofthe moderns, he substitutes
for objective certitude a relative and qualified assent
to the appearances or impressions of sense. He
claims the right to speak and act like other men, pro-
vided it be always understood that such speech and
action implies no belief in the objective truth of im-
pressions.
Closely connected with this theory of probability
is Carneades' defence ofhuman freedom in opposition
to the Stoic determinism.
1
If all events were con-
nected by a chain of cause and effect necessity would
be supreme. What, then, would be in our power ?
Clearly he assumes that something is in our power,
namely, to give or refuse our assent to an appearance
of sense. This was, in fact, universally assumed.
The Stoics started by laying down: (i) that every
event and all movement has a cause a physical
principle; (2) that every proposition, whether about
1
Cicero, De Fctio, passim. Only part of this treatise is preserved.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 345
the present or the future, is true or false a logical
axiom. From this it seems inevitably to follow (3)
that every event is determined by previous events
and, if so, is determined beforehand, is therefore
certain and can be predicted. But if destiny is the
universal law every event is necessary and there is
no place for liberty. But none of the contemporary
schools went so far. Thus Epicurus refuses to admit
that when the atom swerves aside there is any cause
for its declination or that a proposition relating to the
future (e.g., Hermarchus will be either alive or dead
to-morrow) is either true or false. The Stoics, on the
other hand, were driven to accept determinism by a
variety of impelling forces: by their physics, their
support of divination, their theory of the organic
unity of the world and the mutual inter-connection or
"
sympathy
" between all its parts. Theywere bound,
therefore, to accept the nexus ofcause and effect in the
endless chain of phenomena. Still, even theyhad not
the least intention of denying that something is in our
power. Hence Chrysippus, in order to save freedom
(in his own restricted sense of the term), is obliged to
excogitate a difference between destiny and necessity.
There is, he maintains, the logical possibility of an
event not happening although it is certain to happen.
It can be predicted and yet at the same time be con-
tingent. How was this position to be made good ?
His expedient was a subtle distinction between
primary or principal and proximate or subsidiary
causes; a distinction analogous to the old Platonic
and Aristotelian anithesis between cause and con-
dition as explained, e. g. 9 in the Phcedo.
1
According to
Chrysippus, the preceding links in the chain of causa-
tion, are indeed, causes of the events which they con-
1
Cicero, De Fato, 41; cf. Plato, Photo, 98 -99 D.
346 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
dition, but they are only auxiliary or proximate, not
principal causes. We see an object, desire of it
ensues. Our assent is the principal cause, but the
presentation or appearance is a secondary, proximate
cause, the occasion, if you like, on which the true
cause acts. External agency sets the roller in mo-
tion, but it rolls of its own inherent nature. So,
too, the external agency of presentation supplies the
initial impulse, but individual assent and choice
are the result of man's own nature. And, as Clean-
thes had said, man is "free" to obey the universal
law.
Carneades profited by the weak points in such a
theory. By a sorites he proved that it was impossible
to admit destiny without denying liberty. If all events
follow from antecedent external causes, all events are
necessarily connected by a chain of causation. If so,
necessity is the cause of all events. If so, nothing is
in our power. But we are conscious that something
is in our power, whereas if all happens by destiny
all is due to antecedent external causes. Hence all
does not happen by destiny.
1
To maintain this con-
clusion it is not, he thought, necessary with Epicurus
to deny that every event has a cause
2
or to dispute the
logical validity of the disjunctive proposition relating
to the future. It is sufficient to say that not every
event is the result ofantecedent external causes. Our
will does not depend on such antecedent causes.
When we say that a man's actions have no cause, we
mean they are done without antecedent external
cause, and not that they are done absolutely without
a cause. The cause resides in the will, in the man's
individual nature. Epicurus should have said that
the atom swerves in obedience to the law of its own
1
Cicero, De Fato, 31.
3
/&., 33.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 347
nature by its own weight. In other words, alongside
of the series of causes connected by natural necessity,
causes are admitted which do not depend upon any
antecedents causce fortmta? non inclusce in rerum
natura atque mundo accidental causes, not of neces-
sity subsisting in the nature ofthings and in the world.
To this class belong the causes which render the
proposition "Cato will come into the senate" true.
The action of such causes cannot be foreseen or pre-
dicted; only the event discovers that Philoctetes will
be left at Lemnos or that (Edipus will turn parricide.
Carneades, then, holds that every future proposition
is true or false, but not that there are eternal and
immutable causes which prevent things from hap-
pening otherwise than they do happen. Past events
are true because certified by experience; future
events are true because they will hereafter be realised
in experience. The future, then, is just as immu-
table as the past because it is true, and this without
resort to destiny or necessity. Thus, while Car-
neades grants the truth of the disjunctive proposition
relating to the future, he denies that it can be fore-
seen, for, in his judgment, causality is not the same
as invariable succession. He draws a distinction
between matters of speculation and the ordinary af-
fairs of human life, and in the latter he holds with
Butler that "
probability
"
is our guide. Itwill be seen
that his arguments have a far wider bearing than on
the Stoics whom he was immediately attacking.
The whole of ethics as treated by Carneades is
coloured by his theory of probability, but of the
precise manner in which it was applied we have
little information. Here as elsewhere he is first and
foremost a critic. To the conception of an end in
itself he made no opposition. The art of living can-
348 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
not any more than any other art dispense with a
moving principle, and therefore an ideal is requisite
to give to action first an impulse and afterward
consistency. Carneades begins
1
by laying down two
requisites essential in his opinion to the concept ofthe
highest good: (i) it must be accordant with, not
opposed to, nature, and (2) it must be capable of
exciting an impulse or a craving in the mind. He
finds only three ends, or rather motives, which satisfy
these conditions. They are pleasure, freedom from
pain, and the primary objects of natural instinctive
desire. The last phrase, as we have already seen,
includes such things as self-preservation, bodily
health, sound senses, beauty, and mental aptitudes.
Again, each ofthe three ends proposed can be viewed
in a double aspect, according as its mere attainment
or the effort to attain it is regarded as the highestgood.
This would seem to furnish a table of six possible
ideals of life. But as no one ever proposed the effort
to attain either pleasure or painlessness as an end in
itself distinct from the result attained, the list of six
possible ideals is reduced to four. To these four
must be added three others, for in place of a single
and simple highest good a composite ideal of life may
be proposed by the union of two simple ends. This
scheme of classification of all possible ends or ideals
of conduct had a great vogue. The dogmas of con-
temporary schools and of all moralists in the past
could, without much violence, be adjusted to it.
Thus the Cyrenaics and Epicurus, in spite of the
great difference of their principles, were included
under the first head as making pleasure the end.
Freedom from pain, though it might with more reason
have been claimed for Epicurus, was assigned to the
1
Cicero, De Fin., V, 16 sqq.
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 349
Peripatetic Hieronymus. The activity directed to
the primary natural objects as distinct from their
actual attainment was equated with the highest good
proposed by the Stoics, or, in plain terms, with virtue
and morality. Again, the complex ends, the union
of virtue with pleasure or virtue with painlessness
had actually found adherents in Callipho and Dio-
dorus.
1
Finally, by a tour de force, the most cele-
brated ethical doctrines of the past, the views of Plato
and Aristotle and the schools they founded, the Old
Academy and the Peripatetic, were relegated to the
last place on the list as recognising in the highest
good the union of primary natural advantages with
virtue or the activity directed to their attainment.
It is evident that the choice of an ideal will
greatly modify our whole theory of right and wrong.
The Epicurean conception of justice is wholly dif-
ferent from that of the Stoics. Intellectual goodness
and speculative activity hold a very different place
in the systems of Aristotle and of the Stoics. Car-
neades contented himselfwith classifying all possible
ends and pointing out the results which follow from
the selection of any one of them. But he declined
to commit himself. He did not dogmatically assert
what was the nature of the highest good. Indeed,
his favourite disciple Clitomachus professed himself
entirely ignorant of his master's real opinions on
the subject. It can only have been for controversial
purposes that, as we are told, he warmly defended
at one time the attainment of primary natural ad-
vantages and at another time Callipho's union of
virtue and pleasure as the end of life.
2
He even con-
#
1
Cicero, De Fin,, V, 21,
3
Cicero, Acad. Pr., II, 131, 139; cf. De Fin., II, 35, V, 20; Tusc.Disp.,
V, 84.
350 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
tended that on the theory of good there was no es-
sential difference between the Stoics and Peripatetics.
The point at issue was not anything of fundamental
importance but merely verbal quibbling and a change
ofterminology. Whatever his motive in making this
assertion, it was often repeated by his followers and
led to strange perversions of historical fact. In de-
clining to make any particular choice among the
conflicting ends, he acted in conformity not only with
his own principles, but also to some extent with the
temper of the age. Men had become far less con-
fident that a strictly defined course of life would
secure the happiness ofthe individual. Every species
of end, it seemed, had already been proposed and it
was not felt that any of these ends had conferred the
anticipated benefit. Strict conformity to the letter
had betrayed all sects into extravagance. From a
position of neutrality, Carneades had the best op-
portunity for criticising the extravagance of each in
turn with sanity and moderation. The Stoics might
accuse him of sapping the true grounds of morality,
the Epicureans of putting forward a scheme of life
which was poor in theory and impossible in practice.
Yet something might fairly be said for a popular
moral philosophy of which the two cardinal points
were the belief that man's happiness does not depend
upon any ethical theory, and the assertion that all
received ethical theories do not go beyond probability.
Holding such an intermediate position, Carneades
could afford to be humane on questions where the
Stcics were bound to be rigorously ascetic, and, if
Chrysippus professed to find a cold consolation for
the ills of life in the thought that no man is free from
them, his critic, with more good taste and feeling,
urged that to all but the malevolent the universality
SCEPTICISM IN THE ACADEMY 351
of suffering is its saddest aggravation.
1
The con-
viction that the human faculties had but a limited
range was, it is true, an outgrowth of Scepticism, but
it was obvious that it might be so applied as to impair
the rigid exclusiveness of rival systems and to favour
the reaction to Eclecticism.
It is a pity that we do not know more of the con-
structive side of the philosophy of Carneades, that
his destructive criticism has tended to obscure the
other features of his system. The New Academy
had begun with the Socratic profession of ignorance
and the Socratic mode of examining opinions; it
had employed the Pyrrhonean weapons merely as
serviceable in assailing the Stoics and allwho claimed
absolute certitude. Such a procedure had its dangers;
it might easily lead to consequences which the
Academics had not foreseen and would not have
indorsed, the dogmatic assertion that knowledge is
impossible and the self-contradiction which this im-
plies. If Carneades, as we have seen, despaired of
any certainty to be derived from physical investiga-
tions; if neither the senses nor the understanding
furnished knowledge; if he compared logic to a
polypus which devoured its own limbs; and if he
fixed upon no good as the highest, did he, then, de-
spair of philosophy
? Such a conclusion, though
apparently favoured by his negative polemic and his
appeal to the fact that philosophers were hopelessly
divided and that nothinghad been settled by the con-
troversies of the schools, must nevertheless be re-
jected. But ifknowledge, in Hume's language, is re-
solved into probability, what precisely is the function
which philosophy can retain ? It remains as a formal
science but not as a means of discovering truth. Its
1
Cicero, Tusc. Disp., Ill, 59.
352 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
task is to classify presentations and the general no-
tions formed from them. The method ofphilosophy,
then, is a method of testing and arranging concepts,
a result which strikingly agrees with Herbart's defini-
tion.
1
We cannot expect to reach to certainty; we
can but register and compare concepts according to
the standard of probability. It is easy to see that
this, though a scientific theory, is somewhat sterile
and barren of result. The Academics did not always
see that the reasonings used to support an alleged
fact are often false while the fact alleged is true.
But it is their conspicuous merit that least of all the
philosophers of the time they regarded speculation
as a means to an end.
1 Die Bearbeitung der Begriffe. Of course Herbart's conception is in
content wholly different from that of Carneades.
CHAPTER IX
ECLECTICISM
In the middle of the second century B. C. an im-
partial observer and student of history, reflecting on
the tendencies of the time so far as they affected
philosophy, would have been most anxious to know
how the struggle between dogmatism and scepticism,
then at its height, would develop. He would seem-
ingly have been justified in recalling the similar
position in the fifth century when the progress of
pre-Socratic speculation was arrested, and those cele-
brated lecturers the Sophists succeeded in diverting
public attention from philosophy, ofwhich they de-
spaired, to humanism; that is, to the study of litera-
ture, rhetoric, and practical politics. Ifour observer
leaned to dogmatism, he might be pardoned for re-
membering with pride that in the hour when the
Sophists carried all before them, Greece was on the
eve of its greatest philosophical triumphs; that the
reaction against scepticism spread victoriously from
"its humble beginning in Socrates to Plato's heights
of idealism and Aristotle's encyclopaedia of the
sciences. So now, he might have inferred, agnosti-
cism, even when bolstered with probabilism, would
fail in the long run to satisfy men, and he might have
anticipated, not unreasonably, that a reaction would
follow in the wake of the New Academy, perhaps
even a reaction to idealism. For such a reaction
the world had long to wait. The creative impulse
353
354 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
seemed exhausted. Instead of the rise of a new
system, what actually followed was a period of un-
certainty and readjustment, in which almost all ex-
isting schools were tentatively and sensibly modified,
and a gradual fusion and approximation of sharply
opposed theories set in. In this, the period of eclec-
ticism, the independence of every system was threat-
ened ; in the effort to ward off renewed assaults the
very foundations were sapped and shaken from
within. The most powerful solventwas undoubtedly
the negative criticism of Carneades. The vigour of
his onslaught made him the terror of his contempo-
raries. It was one thing to maintain the abstract
thesis that knowledge is unattainable; he had es-
sayed the harder task of proving by argument that it
had not been attained. But there was another in-
fluence at work. The very fact that controversies
prolonged for generations, had brought the dogma-
tists themselves no nearer to agreement must have
led some of the disputants to doubt whether their
principles expressed the whole truth in a complete
and final form. Where there was room for such
misgivings a tendency to modification of doctrine and
mutual accommodation began to show itself in spite
of the obstinacy with which each of the disputants
clung in turn to his favourite tenets. The change
was in the air, but it affected the different schools very
unequally. The Epicureans never diverged from the
principles of their founder. That the Peripatetics
suffered considerably is clear from the treatise De
Mundo, which, though it has come down to us
among Aristotle's works, was certainly written after
his death and contains a remarkable fusion of Stoi-
cism with the principles of his philosophy. Evidence
quite as startling is furnished by two short ethical
ECLECTICISM 355
treatises : De Virtutilus et Vitiis, attributed to Aris-
totle, and De Affectibus, attributed to Andronicus of
Rhodes, a leading Peripatetic, and by the summary
of Peripatetic news or ethics furnished by Stobaeus.
The rise ofneo-Pythagoreanism, another testimony to
the eclectic spirit, must be dismissed as more properly
belonging to a later period. Our attention is de-
manded by the changes introduced into the two other
most important schools, the Stoics and the Academics.
After the prosperous careers of Carneades and
Clitomachus Plato's school met with vicissitudes.
Its next head was Philo ofLarissa,who came to Rome
and taught there in the Mithridatic war, about 88
B. C. Up till that time he had professed allegiance
to the principles ofCarneades, but later he published
a book which provoked strong opposition in the
school. He was charged with wilful misrepresenta-
tion of the facts.
1
The precise nature of his innova-
tions has been the subject of much discussion, but
that he attempted to put a new complexion on the
sceptical teaching of Arcesilas and Carneades is all
but certain. He may have argued at least this
seems the most plausible conjecture
2 that the Aca-
demic leaders, in refuting the Stoic criterion, did not
express their own views, but merely adopted a justi-
fiable, polemical expedient, and he may even have
set up a contrast between the exoteric and the esoteric
doctrines of the Academy, though his opponents
asked in vain what the latter were. However this
may be, the opinions with which Philo is credited
on good authority show a considerable divergence
from the uncompromising scepticism of Carneades.
1
Cicero, Acad. Pr., II, 12 and 18.
2
Cf. the edition of Cicero's Academic^ by Prof. J. S. Reid, Introd.,
pp. 58 sqq.
356 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Things, he contended, were in their own nature
knowable, though not by the standard of knowledge
which the Stoics proposed.
1
Ifhe held such an opin-
ion, it was natural that he should endeavour to in-
terpret the teaching of his predecessors in conformity
with it. We are not, then, surprised to find on unim-
peachable authority
2
that Philo and Metrodorus of
Stratonice affirmed that Carneades had been mis-
understood by everybody. The point at issue was
whether the probable opinions to which Carneades
gave utterance were or were not to be regarded as
assertions of a positive conviction. Clitomachus, of
course, who was best qualified to speak, denied this,
and the counter-statements of two dissentient dis-
ciples is wholly inadequate to shake our belief in the
genuineness of the master's scepticism, supported as
it is by the unanimous testimony of his opponents
the dogmatists. But there is no reason to doubt that
the positive teaching which Philo tried to fasten on
his master was held by himself; in other words, from
the admission of probability as a guide for action
Philo had come to apply it dogmatically in the
theoretical sphere, wilfully oblivious of the very
clear distinction which Carneades laid down between
the absolute and the relative in the matter of assent
and suspension of judgment. If Philo had begun to
compromise with the enemy, his pupil, Antiochus of
Ascalon, the next head of the school, openly capitu-
lated. For years he had maintained the old struggle
against the Stoics, and refuted their claims to set up
an infallible criterion. At last, worn out by con-
1
Sextus Emp., Pyrrh. Hyp., I, 235; cf. Numenius, cited by Eusebius,
Pr. Ev,, XIV, 9, i.
a Ind. Here. Acad. phil. (A list of the adherents of theAcademy found
at Herculaneum and edited by Bxicheler, Greifswald, 1869.) Cf. Cicero,
Acad. Prf, II, 78. Augustinus, Contr* Academicus, III, 41.
ECLECTICISM 357
troversy, he recanted his agnostic errors and declared
knowledge not only to be possible, but possible
through the very criterion which he had so long re-
fused to recognise.
1
But his surrender on this all-
important issue was only a typical instance of his
complete change of front. His later opinions, thanks
to Cicero, who knew him and heard him lecture, are
as well known to us as those of any philosopher after
Plato, and a strange medley they are. From his
chair in the Academy he taught Stoic logic, Stoic
physics, and an ethical theory which was only not
orthodox Stoicism because it was fatally wanting in
the unity, coherence, and consistency which even
opponents admired in the Stoics. With a singular
disregard of internal probability, Antiochus was not
content with borrowing almost all his new-found
dogmas from the Stoics, but coolly claimed them for
his own rightful inheritance. With a strange per-
version of the historical sense, he charged Zeno with
having originally stolen the characteristic principles
of Stoicism from the old Academy. To that term
he gave a liberal interpretation. By an effort of the
imagination he made the old Academy embrace the
critics and opponents as well as the followers of
Plato, all united in one harmonious school ofdoctrine.
He claimed for it not only Speusippus, Xenocrates,
Polemo, Crates, and Grantor, but also Aristotle and
Theophrastus, and even Zeno himself, for was not
he, too, like Arcesilas, a disciple of Polemo ? That
the old Academy and the Peripatetics were, in Cicero's
words,
2 one single school, differing in their nomen-
1
Cicero, Acad. Pr., II, 69; cf. Numenius, cited by Eusebius, Pr. Ev. t
XIV, 9, 2; Augustinus, Contr. Acad.^ II, 6, 15, III, 18, 41.
2
Cicero, Acad. Post., 1, 17, 18. Thisassumption runs through the whole
exposition, Acad. Post., I, 19 to 46; see esp. 24 sqq., 30 sqq. t 33, 35, 40,
358 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
clature while they agreed in substance, was asserted
by this singular authority with so much vehemence
that he might have turned even wiser heads than
Cicero's. Here, then, we have eclecticism with a
vengeance. If we may judge by the procedure of
Antiochus, its privilege is arbitrarily to fit together
various parts of different systems into a more or less
incongruous whole at the caprice of the individual
eclectic. Poor as was the performance, it sufficed.
The scepticism of the Academy died out in the first
century B. C. Almost its last representative in litera-
ture was Cicero, and Cicero, as we shall see,was him-
self an eclectic.
Though he made no independent contributions to
philosophy, Cicero, by his writings, did much to
render the subject familiar to his countrymen. He
had good opportunities for becoming acquainted with
all the schools; he had heard most ofthe leadingmen
lecture, and his wide reading was directed by the
ambition of adding a new department to Latin
literature. His procedure in compiling his numerous
treatises was very simple. As he ingenuously con-
fesses, he did the work of a translator.
1
He would
select some acknowledged authority of repute for the
views he wished to expound, and reproduce the gist
of the argument, putting it into the mouth of some
Roman of eminence. The setting of the dialogue,
a judicious sprinkling of historical illustrations, and
the proems or introductions were all thatwas required
to adapt Clitomachus or Antiochus, Panaetius or
Posidonius to the needs of Roman readers. This
46. The system expounded under Plato's name is simply the eclectic
construction of Antiochus; see alsoDe Fin,, IV, 14-45, S6 s^-> 60 sqq.
1
Epp. ad Atticum, XIII, 52, apographa sunt; minore labors fiunt;
verba tantum adfero, quibus abundo.
ECLECTICISM 359
much Cicero could easily furnish himself, while his
real gift for exposition, combined with his enthusiasm
for his subject, enabled him to turn out in rapid
succession a series of readable dialogues dealing with
many of the most controverted topics of the day.
A professed adherent of the NewAcademy,he valued
highly the privilege of criticising all opinions without
being committed unreservedly to the defence of any,
a privilege which a barrister above all men would
appreciate. When he comes to questions oflaw and
morality, Cicero makes a singular use of his free-
dom to hold whatever opinion seems probable. He
wholly dissociates himself from the negative views of
Carneades, with which he had no more sympathy
than with the utilitarian ethics of Epicurus.
1
A
violent reaction against both led him at first to accept
the eclecticism of Antiochus, but gradually he ap-
proximated more closely to the Stoics whose rigid
consistency and moral idealism had a fascination for
him as for other Romans in spite ofthe hard criticism
which at other times he passed upon them. Hence
in reviewing his opinions we have to distinguish the
pupil of Carneades in the Academica, De Natura
Deorum, De Divinatione, andDe Fato, from the pupil
ofAntiochus inDe Legibus andDe Finibus; and from
the defender of Stoic Ethics in the Tusculan Dispu-
tations and De Officiis. We can never be sure, how-
ever, whether any opinion advanced in Cicero's works
is really his own, and he protests emphatically that he
is not bound by previous utterances and that it is a
mistake to fasten upon himself the inconsistencies of
his different writings.
2 In this conspicuous example
of a professed sceptic we see the havoc which the
1
See, for instance, De Legibus., I, 39.
a Tusc. Disp.t V, 33, 82.
360 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
disintegrating spirit of eclecticism had wrought upon
the symmetry and consistency of all systems of
thought. More than a century afterward the same
arbitrary acceptance of different philosophemes char-
acterised the otherwise interesting contribution of the
historian Plutarch of Chaeronea to the controversial
literature of the schools. This eclectic also was, like
Cicero, a professed Academic, but he differed from
Cicero, not only in the range of positive doctrines
that he embraced, but still more in the unsparing
severity with which he directed his harsh and un-
sympathetic criticism against Stoics and Epicureans
alike.
1
In the history of Stoicism it is usual to distinguish
three periods. In the first the doctrine was elabo-
rated. The two centuries following upon the death
of Chrysippus form the middle period, a period of
transition, during which the older doctrines were
modified, simplified, and occasionally relaxed in an
eclectic spirit. To the last of the three periods be-
long the Roman Stoics ofthe Empire, such as Seneca,
Musonius, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. With
the death of Chrysippus the energy of the school re-
laxed. His immediate successors, Zeno of Tarsus,
Diogenes of Seleucia (often called the Babylonian),
Antipater of Tarsus, were men of no originality
though not without ability. On the two last named
fell the brunt of the conflict with Carneades. When
Stoicism emerged from this conflict, the physical
basis of the system remained unchanged but was
neglected. Problems of interest bearing upon psy-
chology and natural theology continued to be dis-
1
Against the Stoics in De Commumbus Notitiis and De Stoicorunt
Repugnantiis, against Epicurus in Adversus Coloten and Non posse
suavtier mvi secundum Epicurum*
ECLECTICISM 361
cussed. But all original research, all lively interest
in that department ceased. We hear that Diogenes
expressed doubts as to the cycles of the world's
existence and that his disciple Boethus renounced
the belief in the universal conflagration. His doc-
trine of a deity not immanent in but distinct from the
inanimate universe, which he superintends from with-
out, was a compromise between Stoic and Peripatetic
teaching.
In the department of ethics the Stoic teachers were
occupied in elaborating their conception of the good,
and in particular they endeavoured to bridge the
gulf which separated the objects of natural and in-
stinctive desire from the rational end ofhuman action.
We meet with several glosses or interpretations of the
formula of Chrysippus which were current at this
time and it is impossible to mistake the controversial
aim of such alterations. Thus Antipater distin-
guished between the mere attainment of primary
natural ends and the activity directed to their attain-
ment, accepting Carneades' identification of this
activity with virtue. But earlier still, Diogenes had
defined the end thus: "To calculate rightly in the
selection and rejection ofthings according to nature."
Archedemus, a contemporary of Diogenes, put this
in plainer terms still. "The end," he said, "is to live
in the performance of all fitting actions/' z. e.y of all
relative duties (Kathekonta). Now it is highly im-
probable that the earlier Stoics would have sanctioned
such interpretations of their definitions. The mere
performance of relative or imperfect duties, they
would have said, is something neither good nor evil;
the essential constituent of human good is ignored.
And this, we know, is the criticism which in a later
age was actually passed by Posidonius. His words
362 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
are: "This is not the end, but only its necessary
concomitant; such a mode of expression may be use-
ful for the refutation ofobjections put forward by the
Sophists" more precisely, by Carneades "but it
contains nothing ofmorality or well-being/'
x
He saw
clearly that the concessions extorted by the assaults
of the adversary went perilously near to sacrificing
the essential dogmas of Stoic ethics. The rigour and
consistency of the older system were sensibly modi-
fied by the increased importance and fuller treatment
which from this time onward fell to the lot ofexternal
duties.
To this result another important factor contributed.
The picture of the impeccable sage had embodied
that enthusiasm for righteousness which breathes
with Semitic earnestness through all the teaching
of the earlier Stoics. But the sage had become
an ideal. Men in earnest about right living felt
the need of practical precepts, of rules for the daily
conduct of life. They could not always imitate the
sage, but they could at least learn to appreciate the
importance of the "external" duties required of all
men, wise or unwise. The central figure in this
middle period of Stoicism was a remarkable man.
Born at Rhodes about 185 B. C. Panaetius was a
citizen of the most flourishing of Greek cities, and
almost the only one which still retained vigour and
freedom. Yet he lived for years in the house of
Scipio Africanus the younger, at Rome, accompanied
him on embassies and campaigns, and was perhaps
the first Greek who in a private capacity had any in-
sight into the working of the Roman state or the
character of its citizens. Later in life, as head ofthe
Stoic school at Athens, he achieved a reputation
1
Galen, De Plac. Hipp. & Plat., p. 470, Ktihn.
ECLECTICISM 363
second only to that ofChrysippus. He is the earliest
Stoic author from whom we have, even indirectly,
any considerable piece ofwork, as Books I and II of
the De Officlis are a rechauffe, in Cicero's fashion, of
Panaetius "Upon External Duty/'
The introduction of Stoicism at Rome was the
most momentous of the many changes that it saw.
After the first sharp collision with the jealousy of the
national authorities, it found a ready acceptance and
made rapid progress among the noblest families. In
Greece its insensibility to art and the cultivation of
life was a fatal defect; not so with shrewd men ofthe
world desirous of qualifying as advocates or jurists.
It supplied them with an incentive to scientific re-
search in archaeology and grammar; it penetrated
jurisprudence until the belief in the ultimate identity
of the Jus Gentium with the law of nature modified
the praetor's edicts for centuries. Even to the Roman
state religion, with its narrow conceptions and burden-
some rites, it became in some sort a support. Soe-
vola, following Panaetius, explained that the prudenceof statesmen had established this public institution
in the service of order midway between the errors of
popular superstition and the barren truths of en-
lightened philosophy. Soon the influence of the
pupils reacted upon the doctrines taught. For ab-
stract discussions the ordinary Roman cared little or
nothing. He was naturally an eclectic, for, indif-
ferent to the scientific basis or logical development
of doctrines, he selected from various writers and
from different schools what he found most service-
able. All had to be simplified and disengaged from
technical subtleties. To attract his Roman pupils
Panaetius would naturally choose simple topics sus-
ceptible of rhetorical treatment or of application to
364 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
individual details. He was the representative, not
merely of Stoicism, but of Greece and Greek liter-
ature, and would feel pride in introducing its greatest
masterpieces. He had a particular admiration for
the writings of Plato. The classic style, the exquisite
purity of the language, the flights of imagination ap-
pealed to him no less strongly than the philosophy.
He marks a reaction of the genuine Hellenic spirit
against the narrow austerity ofthe first Stoics,. Zeno
and Chrysippus had introduced a repellent technical
terminology; theif writings lacked every grace of
style. With Panaetius the Stoic became eloquent;
he did his best to improve the uncouth words in
vogue, even at some slight cost of accuracy.
To Roman society, then, Panaetius came as the
missionary of Hellenic culture. The
inculcate<J-^Yas Stoicjs(Q}, it is true, but a broad-
minJed and liral^Siasj^^olerant and concilia-
tory. He himselfdiverged from orthodoxy on several
important points. Like Boethus, he abandoned the
doctrine of a periodic conflagration of the universe.
This involved the further consequence that he re-
nounced the limited immortality hitherto accepted in
the school, for, acc^jjngtoj^^
souls of the wise, and ortK?^ a*
tk&^general
conflagratiQjTu He rejected the old Stoic doctrine of
diyifliariog^i In these deviations it is easy"t:o*TfSelhe
'influence of Carneades. But the eclectic tendencies
of the time are more significantly betrayed by his
innovations in ethics, which were delicately adjusted
to the susceptibilities of men of the world. It may
be too much to say that he introduced and expounded
a twofold standard of morality. But he certainly
ECLECTICISM 365
divided virtues into two classes, theoretical and prac-
tical; that is to say, he recognised in Prudence an in-
tellectual faculty co-ordinate with the three cardinal
virtues, Justice, Courage, and Temperance, which
were practical, and, without altogether abandoning
the aspiration after perfect wisdom and virtue, he
never forgot that his business was with those who
had set out on the road to virtue and were a long way
removed from the ideal sage. This in itself impairs
the rigid consistency ofan ethical system which starts
from the proposition that all virtue is one and is es-
sentially knowledge. In the first book of his cele-
brated treatise on appropriate action or external duty
Panaetius dealt with moral good; in the second book
with expediency or utility. His translator, Cicero,
complains with justice that he omitted to treat the
cases in which a conflict of motives is conceivable,
where one line of conduct is dictated on grounds of
morality and a different line of conduct suggested by
considerations of expediency. This omission Cicero
himself endeavours to the best ofhis ability to supply
in his own third book, De Officiis. Here even more
than in the other parts of the treatise the reader can-
not fail to note that relaxation of the moral standard
which seems inevitable when problems of every-day
life are discussed in a spirit of casuistry. A few ex-
amples will suffice. It is disputed whether thevendor
is bound to disclose defects in an article submitted for
sale; whether in a storm at sea the owner should
make jettison ofworthless slaves or ofvaluable cargo.
No dialectical quibbles can blind us to the fact that
in these problems we are concerned with a second-
rate morality, a conventional code which has the
public opinion of the day for its ultimate sanction.
Its embodiment is the honest man, the respectable
366 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
citizen, vir bonus, whose judgment Panaetius and
Cicero endeavour to enlighten as best they can.
Passing over other disciples of Panaetius, ofwhom
Hecato is the most conspicuous, we come to Posi-
donius (130-46 B. C.), who carried on among the
Romans of the next generation the work his master
had begun. By birth a Syrian of Apamea, he spent
many years in travel and scientific researches in
Spain and Gaul, Africa and Sicily, Liguria and the
regions to the east of the Adriatic. When he settled
as a teacher at Rhodes his fame attracted numerous
scholars. He became known to many eminent Ro-
mans, among them Marius, Rutilius, Pompey, and
Cicero. He was, without doubt, the most learned
man of his age. He was the last Stoic who took an
interest in physics and busied himselfwith the positive
sciences, as his contributions to geography, natural
history, mathematics, and astronomy sufficiently at-
test. He sought to determine the distance and mag-
nitude of the sun, to calculate the diameter of the
earth and the influence of the moon on the tides.
Judged from the modern stand-point, he may appear
uncritical or even credulous, but at the time his spirit
of fearless inquiry provoked the criticism of his con-
temporary Strabo, who deemed it altogether alien to
the Stoic school,
1
and almost Peripatetic. Add to this
that he was a competent historian who wrote a nar-
rative of his own times from the fall of Corinth to the
Mithridatic war, in fifty-two books. This, like his
numerous other writings, proved a mine of informa-
tion to subsequent writers. The wavering and want
of finality characteristic of eclecticism is well seen
when we compare his philosophical tenets with those
of Panaetius. The master and the pupil alike took
1
Strabo, II, 3, p. 104.
ECLECTICISM 367
the liberty of diverging from Stoic orthodoxy, but in
different directions. Posidonius fell back upon the
old beliefin divination, and the series ofworld-cycles,
each ending in a general conflagration. But in re-
turn he broke more completely than any one before
him with the psychology of his school. Finding it
impossible to explain the emotions as judgments or
the effects of judgment, in short, as morbid states of
the one rational soul, he gave up the unity ofthe soul.
To account for the emotions he postulated, like Plato,
an irrational principle, including a concupiscent and
a spirited element, although he subordinated all three
as faculties to the one substance of the soul lodged in
the heart. This heterodox conclusion he did not
scruple to avow in the definition which he gave of the
end of action, namely, "to live in contemplation of
the reality and order of the universe, promoting it to
the best of our power, and never led astray by the
irrational part of the soul/' Strange language this,
in the mouth of a Stoic. He also maintained the
immortality and very probably the pre-existence of
the rational soul, and we learn without surprise that
his admiration for Plato led him to write a com-
mentary on the Timceus.
Other evidence might be adduced, but from what
has been said it is clear that Panaetius and Posidonius,
the two most eminent Stoics of the middle period,
handled the traditional doctrines with remarkable
freedom. If their innovations had, in the long run,
little permanent effect it was because in the last
period of Stoicism men ceased to take an interest in
such questions. Their whole attitude had become
changed. Their attention was concentrated upon
ethics, and even in this department they regarded the
scientific basis, the interlacing network of theories,
368 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
as matter of curiosity rather than of edification.
Epictetus and even Seneca, for the most part, pro-
fessed a general allegiance to the first founders.
Untroubled by critical doubts, they acquiesced in the
doctrines ofZeno and Aristo, Cleanthes and Chrysip-
pus. When Seneca, for example, does touch upon
the theoretical side of Stoicism, it is in the hope of
finding some novelty to interest his readers and al-
most in the spirit of antiquarian research. To be
over-curious on speculative questions is generally re-
garded as reprehensible, as diverting the attention of
the individual from the all-important task of his own
moral improvement. The Roman Stoic of imperial
times addressed his appeal to the reason and con-
science ofmen, but it was no part of his ambition to
become a speculative thinker himself or to make
thinkers of others. Indifference to exact scientific
theory and willingness to accept good moral teaching
from any quarter, from Plato and Epicurus as readily
as from Chrysippus, is not peculiar to Seneca; it is
the common characteristic of all the later Stoics.
Philosophy in their view is the healer to whom men
come from a sense of their weakness and disease,
whose business is "with the sick, not with the whole."
Thewisdom bywhich she heals is not a matter oflong
dissertations or dialectical subtleties, but rather a
continual meditation and self-discipline. To endure
and to renounce, to bear and to forbear, is the watch-
word of Epictetus. The way to virtue, says Seneca,
is not hard to find, but the life ofonewho treads it is a
continual struggle, a campaign in which there is no
repose. By constant effort alone can we emerge
victorious from the conflict and build up a fixed habit
and rational character.
An apology is due to the reader for this hasty and
ECLECTICISM 369
inadequate glimpse at a great philosophical system
in the last stages of its development. It long con-
tinued to exert a profound influence upon adherents
who had become professedly indifferent to its theories,
if for no other reason because this system alone of-
fered satisfaction to the deepest longings of earnest
and strenuous natures. The Roman empire en-
joyed external prosperity; the accumulation of ma-
terial wealth, the growth of luxury and frivolity, went
on unabated. The most eminent Stoics were usually
found in the ranks of the opposition, carrying on
against the Caesars the hopeless struggle to which as a
party and a sect they had been committed by Cato of
Utica. But whether in opposition like Thrasea or in
office like Seneca, the principles of a Stoic brought
him sooner or later into collision with the government,
and under the early empire, at any rate, the victims of
tyranny included not a few martyrs to philosophy.
In this respect Stoicism stands apart from other an-
cient schools; ifwe except the occasional outbursts
of local fanaticism against the "godless" Epicure-
ans, there was no other sect before the rise ofChristi-
anity of sufficient importance to be persecuted.
It has been shown that the unsettling ferment of
eclecticismbeganamong contending schools atAthens,
was fostered by the powerful polemic of Carneades,
and gained a remarkable impetus when philosophi-
cal issues were presented to the phlegmatic,matter-of-
fact Roman temper. As the movement progressed,
the Academy ceased to be sceptical, the Peripatetics
made compromising concessions; the Stoics of the
middle period suffered doubts and scruples to lead
them now in this direction, now in that in the path
ofinnovating reform, while in their successors eclectic
tendencies were just as completely, if unconsciously,
370 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
manifested by that concentration upon practical
ethics which involved the almost total neglect of all
other parts ofthe system. To this general disintegra-
tion ofdogmatism the rise of the later Sceptics gave a
finishing, satirical touch.
CHAPTER X
.ENESIDEMUS AND THE REVIVAL OF
PYRRHONISM
The connection between medicine and philosophy,
it is now generally recognised, was much closer in
ancient than in modern times. The long series of
medical writers, from Hippocrates to Galen, abound
in allusions to the problems of science in general and
to the opinions ofcontemporary thinkers. For some
two centuries before Galen's advent the condition
of medicine was by no means satisfactory. Great
discoveries had been made, but their meaning was
not fully apprehended. Amid the controversies of
rival schools' there was nowhere an established or
accepted authority which commanded respect, no
one system entitled to universal recognition. The
practitioner might well feel justified in holding, as a
matter of experience, that in his own department, at
any rate, there was no such thing as certainty. It is
not surprising that such a conviction should bias his
general outlook on the world. At all events it is a
significant fact that many of the later Sceptics be-
longed to the medical profession and in particular to
the empirical school; the coincidence between oppo-
sition to dogmatism in medicine and in philosophy
can hardly be fortuitous. By a fortunate accident
the writings of one eminent physician and sceptic,
Sextus Empiricus, have been preserved. To his zeal
and industry we are indebted for a very complete
371
372 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
summary of the sceptical position as he understood
it, and as he drew freely on his predecessors we are
introduced to the arguments and opinions ofthinkers
more eminent than himself, who but for his work
would be little more than names to us. Sextus was
in his day the head ofthe sceptical school, if school it
can be called, which he denied. He lived about
200 A. D., and spent at least part of his life at Rome.
As a physician he belonged, in spite of his name, to
the school of medicine opposed to the Empirics and
known as the Methodics. He wrote Pyrrhonean
Outlines (Hypotypdseis), in three books; Against
the Dogmatists, in five books, which deal succes-
sively with Logic, Physics, and Ethics, and lastly six
books in which he combated the special sciences of
Grammar and Rhetoric, Geometry and Arithmetic,
Astronomy and Music. The two last are properly
distinct treatises; they are usually cited, however, as
parts of a single treatise, Adversus Mathematicos,
in eleven books. These writings, of which the
Pyrrhonean Outlines are at once the earliest and the
best, are a storehouse of information respecting the
latest phase of sceptical teaching. Not only are
the position and aims of Pyrrhonism clearly de-
fined, but the arguments by which it was supported
are given in fullwith constant reference to the counter-
arguments of the different dogmatic schools. When
Sextus has set forth his own position and guarded
it from attack on every side, he, of course, assumes
the offensive. The bulk ofhis writings then becomes
polemical, and almost everysystem ofphilosophy is in
turn examined and refuted to his own satisfaction.
As he proceeds with his task certain features in his
method arrest our attention. An enormous advance
has been made in the precise formulation and syste-
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 373
matisation of the argument. Though dissociating
himself from the Academics, Sextus has taken good
care to incorporate whatever he could find in Car-
neades and Clitomachus available for his own pur-
pose, notably the rejection of formal logic, including
demonstration, syllogism, induction, definition, di-
vision, and every other logical instrument.
1
The impression he makes is that of a diligent and
clearsighted compiler with notmuch originality. For
an historian ofphilosophy hisequipmentwas certainly
defective. The only dogmatic system he was thor-
oughly versed in was that of the Stoics. He was but
imperfectly acquainted with Plato; his knowledge of
Aristotle is so slight that it was probably gained at
second hand; even Epicurus he had studied none too
well. The amount of material he has amassed is not
always well arranged, and he is sometimes lacking
in internal coherence. Still, he is conspicuous for
clearness and good sense. His acknowledgments to
his predecessors are frequent. Accordingly it is to
these predecessors that we must direct our attention.
Sextus makes it abundantly evident to whom the
merit of the teaching he advocates and expounds is
really due. Besides scepticism in this elaborate and
comprehensive form had been inculcated long before
his time. Diogenes Laertius has preserved a
list^
of
sceptical teachers, beginning with Pyrrho and ending
with Saturninus the pupil of Sextus, who is made the
fourteenth in the succession.
2 But he impartially
mentions the statement of Menodotus, the eleventh
1
Sextus Emp., Pyrrh. Hyp., II, 134-259-
2
Diog., LaSrt, IX, 115, 116. The names are (i) Pyrrho, (2) Timon,
(3) Euphranor, (4) Eubulus of Alexandria, (5) Ptolemseus of Cyrene,
(6) Heraclides, (7) ^Enesidemus, (8) Zeuxippus, (9) Zeuxis, (10) An-
tiochus of Laodicea, (n) Menodotus, (12) Herodotus of Tarsus, (13)
Sextus Empiricus, (14) Saturninus.
374 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
on the list, to the effect that Pyrrho's school died out
after Timon, who left no disciples. On this point
there can be no reasonable doubt that Menodotus was
right. When we examine the list we may, with per-
fect confidence, accept the last eight links of the
chain, from ^Enesidemus the seventh to Saturninus
the fourteenth. Undoubtedly these were all Pyrrho-
nists or later Sceptics standing to each other in the
relation of master to pupil. When we go further
back there is room for caution. Quite apart from
the plain statement of Menodotus, there are chrono-
logical difficulties in continuing the chain, as the list
of Diogenes does, backward to Timon. The names
are too few to bridge over two centuries. On the
other hand a motive for the extension of the list is
easily suggested, namely, the desire to represent the
later Sceptics as affiliated by unbroken tradition to
the master whom they venerated and whose name
they chose to revive.
We assume, then, the genuineness of the list from
^Enesidemus onward to Sextus and Saturninus, and,
in common with all recent historians of philosophy,
it is to ^Enesidemus that we attribute the resuscita-
tion of Pyrrhonism in the permanent form which it
maintained for at least two centuries.
1
Of the per-
sonal history of this remarkable man little is known;
even his birthplace is variously given as Cnossus in
Crete and ^Egae in Achaea. A list of his works and
a sketch of their contents is preserved by Photius.
2
There is besides a passing mention of him by Aris-
1
Eusebius, Pr. Ev. } XIV, 18, 22, citing Aristocles, Bk. VIII., De Phil-
osophia, states this explicitly, But Diog. LaSrt., IX, 115, cites Meno-
dotus to the effect that the revival of Pyrrhonism began somewhat earlier
with Ptolemaeus, the fifth on the list given in the last note.
*BiWotheca (Myr. Cod., 212), p. i6Qb, 18 sqq. (Bekker) .
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 375
tocles.
1
For the rest we depend upon the copious
references of Sextus, who was more indebted to him
than to any of his predecessors. That he taught at
Alexandria and originally belonged to the Academy
seems certain. His teacher Heraclides probably be-
longed to the same section of the Academy as Cicero,
and, like him, resented the capitulation ofAntiochus
to the Stoics. .ZEnesidemus himself went further.
He attributed this fatal declension to inherent weak-
ness in the position ofthe scepticalAcademy through-
out, from Arcesilas and Carneades to Clitomachus
and Philo of Larissa. They had, he maintained, all
along been dogmatists in disguise. They had an-
nounced their negative conclusions too confidently,
and denied the possibility of knowledge without re-
serve. This statement, we may remark in passing,
though often repeated by the later Sceptics, would
have been flatly contradicted by the Academics them-
selves, as it is by Cicero. It was necessary, then, to
make a fresh start and go back to Pyrrho. Accord-
ingly, ^Enesidemus wrote a treatise in eight books
and called it Pyrrhonean Discourses. In the first
book he sketched the principles of Pyrrhonean as
distinct from Academic scepticism, and his reasons
for dissenting from the latter, which are essentially
the same as those given by Sextus. The remaining
books of this treatise were chiefly polemical, and in
them he subjected the procedure of all the schools,
especially the Stoic, to thorough-going criticism^ in
the three departments of logic, physics, and ethics.
Here again his example is faithfully followed by
Sextus. The work was dedicated to Lucius .ZElius
Tubero, a prominent Roman statesman, and this
fact furnishes the best clue to its date. It has re-
1
Eusebius, Pr. Ev., XIV, 18, 3, 8 sqq., 22.
376 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
cently been proved that Philo of Alexandria was
acquainted with and made use of the treatise. It is
therefore not impossible that the Tubero in question
was the well-known statesman who was Cicero's
friend and contemporary. Even if, as has some-
times been assumed, though quite unnecessarily, he
was a different individual belonging to the same
family and bearing the same name, he cannot have
lived many decades later. The silence of Cicero,
both as to the revival of Pyrrhonism and the work
dedicated to Tubero, nay, the very existence of its
author,would be most naturally explained ifthework
itself was not written or at any rate not published
until after Cicero's death, B. C. 43. In anotherwork,
his Outline Introductory to Pyrrhonism, .ZEneside-
mus undertook to arrange the whole material at the
disposal of the Sceptic in his contention against the
dogmatic position under ten heads or tropes.
1
The
word trope properly denotes procedure; the ten
tropes were intended to contain the means of refuting
dogmatism in all possible forms, and to provide direc-
tions for stating every lineofavailable argumentwhich
could lead to negative conclusions and paralyseassent.
The first trope starts with differences in the con-
stitution of different animals and in their modes
of perception. Some animals have one sense highly
developed, some another. In the sense ofsmellmany
are superior to man. The second trope applies this
line of argument to the individual differences be-
1
Sextus Emp. Pyrrh. Hyp., I, 35-164; Diog. LaSrt, IX, 79-88. The
ten tropes are expressly attributed to ^Enesidemus by Sextus Emp., Adv.
Math,, VIII, 345; Diog. Laert, IX, 78, 87; Aristocles, cited in Eusebius,
Pr. JEfu. 9 XIV, 18, ii. The latter, if the text is correct, speaks of nine,
not ten, tropes; cf. Philo of Alexandria, De ebriet,, pp. 383-388, Mang.,
also Von Arnim, Philo und Mnesidem, Quellenstudien zu Philo von
Alexandria- (Berlin, 1888), pp. 53-100, esp. pp. 56 sqq.
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 377
tween man and man. For example, Demophon, the
steward ofAlexander, is said to have feltwarm in the
shade and to have shivered in the sun; Andron the
Argive was scarcely sensible of thirst; and there was
no lack of other well-known instances of abnormal
development to appeal to. The third proceeds from
the variety in the constitution of the sense-organs,
showing that the same object appears under different
aspects according to the senses to which it is pre-
sented. An apple is yellow to the sight, sweet to the
taste, fragrant to the smell; had we more senses, the
Sceptic argues, we might discover other qualities.
The fourth proceeds from the variability ofour physi-
cal state and mental mood and the effect of such con-
ditions as sleep, waking, joy, grief, hunger, thirst, etc.
When the state of the percipient is so variable, how
are we to decide which is the proper state for the per-
ception ofexternal things ? Hewho offers a standard
or criterion must be prepared to prove its validity,
and this will be found to be impossible. If so, it is
impossible to form any judgment on external things.
The fifth
l
adduces the diversities of appearance due
to the position and distance of objects. Thus the
dove's neck exhibits kaleidoscopic colours in the sun's
light, square towers in the distance appear round,
straight sticks in the water bent. The sixth pro-
ceeds from the mode and mechanism of sense-percep-
tion. Thus visible objects are not seen directly, but
always through a medium, whether air, water, vapour
or fog. The instrument, the eye, is liable to water
and to be covered by films. So, too, with the ear, the
1 In Diog. Laert, IX, 85, this trope appears as the seventh. Similarly
what is given in the text as the seventh is in Diogenes made the eighth;
the eighth of the text is in Diogenes the tenth, and the tenth of the text is
in Diogenes the fifth.
378 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
nose, the tongue, the skin; all the instruments of
sense are subject to alterations, which form fresh
barriers between us and knowledge of the external
object as it is. The seventh proceeds from variation
in quantity and the modes in which objects are pre-
sented, as temperature, colour, motion. For in-
stance, while the scrapings of goats' horn appear
white, the horn itself appears black, but silver filings
appear black while a mass of silver looks white.
The eighth proceeds more generally from the rela-
tivity of all phenomena. All external things are
relative, not only to the perceiving subject, but also
to one another. Thus the same man is in one rela-
tion son, in another father, in another brother. The
ninth proceeds from the strength of association,
pointing out that impressions familiar to us cause no
surprise, while what is novel and strange for that very
reason excites wonder. The tenth proceeds in a
similar manner from the diversity in manners and
customs, law and religion, beliefs and opinions in
general among different nations, pointing out, e. g.,
how widely the standard of right and wrong has dif-
fered in different ages and countries. It has been
well observed that these ten tropes scarcely merit the
reputation they acquired in antiquity. It is difficult
to detect any order in their arrangement or thread of
connection between them. Sextus dilates upon them
and loads them with illustrations. In his view the
first four relate to the judging subject, the seventh
and eighth to the object judged, the remainder to
both subject and object. But the fact is, they all
enunciate more or less indirectly the relativity of
human knowledge.
1
They do not contain anything
*
Cf. Lotze, Logic, Bk. Ill, a i., 310. "The ten tropes, or logical
grounds of doubt, all come to this, that sensations by themselves cannot
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 379
that had not been at least as well said before, either by
the sophists or the New Academy, and they do not
atone for their lack of novelty by any precision of
scientific arrangement. Aswe have seen, the order in
which they are enumerated by Sextus differs from that
of Diogenes Laertius. In many ofthe later headswe
find practically repeated the substance of the former.
The inference is obvious that the table was drawn up
quite empirically to satisfy no other requirements
than the convenience of polemical controversy.
Subsequently an attempt was made to reduce the
number of the tropes or rather to make a new list.
Five sceptical tropes attributed to Agrippa
1
are as
follows: The first is based on the discrepancy of
human opinions, the second on the fact that every
proof itself requires to be proved which implies a
regressus ad infinitum, the third on the relativity of
our knowledge which varies according to the con-
stitution of the percipient and the circumstances in
which he perceives, the fourth is really a completion
ofthe second and forbids the assumption ofunproven
propositions as the premisses of an argument. The
fifth seeks to show that reasoning essentially involves
a vicious circle inasmuch as the principle adduced in
proof requires itself to be supported by that which
it is called in to prove. The first and third of these
tropes cover the same ground as the more famous ten,
which consist in the main of arguments derived from
the fallibility of the senses; the remaining three are
new and attackthe possibility ofdemonstration. Un-
less the premisses ofdemonstration are assumed with-
discover to us what is the nature of the objectwhich excitesthem." For
Lotze's examination of the tropes and of the sceptical position in general
see Ib. 310-312 (II, I93-I99- English translation).
1
Sextus Emp., Pyrrh. Hyp., 1, 164-178; Diog. Laert., IX, 88 sqq.
380 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
out proof, the dogmatist will find himself committed
either to an infinite regress or to a vicious circle. A
further attempt at simplification was made by re-
ducing the tropes to two only:
*
(i) Nothing is self-
evident, for if things were certain of themselves men
would not differ about them; (2) nor can anything
be made certain by proof, because we must either
arrive in the process at something self-evident or we
must involve ourselves in an endless regress.
In the ten tropes the Sceptic confines himself to
the well-worn story of the contradiction revealed by
sensible phenomena. Agrippa's list of five tropes
presents in addition the difficulties inherent in all
attempts at logical demonstration. Here, no doubt,
the influence ofthe sceptical Academy can be traced,
But it is not on the tropes with which we have been
dealing hitherto that the claims of .ZEnesidemus to a
place among speculative inquirers should be based.
His reputation for originality is due rather to a series
of arguments concerned with truth, with causality
and with signs, all of which, as they were understood
by the dogmatists, he seeks to overthrow. We pass
then, under the guidance of Sextus,
2
to the first of
these, the argumentation against truth. ^Eneside-
mus maintains that there is no such thing as truth,
and skilfully adapts to his purpose the current dis-
tinction between objects of sense and objects of
thought, between things sensible and things intel-
ligible.
If truth exists it is one or other of these: it is
either something sensible or something intelligible,
or it is at once both sensible and intelligible or it is
neither sensible nor intelligible. Now every one of
1
Sextus Emp., Pyrrh. Hyp., I, 178-180.
2 Adv* Math,, VIII, 40-48; cf. Pyrrh Hyp, II, 80-97,
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 381
these alternatives is impossible. Truth is not sen-
sible, for sensible things are either generic or specific.
Things generic are the resemblances common to
several individuals, like man and horse, found in
every man and in every horse. Things specific are
the qualities peculiar to this or that individual, to
Dion or Theon. If, then, truth is a sensible thing it
must be either generic or specific; now it is neither
generic nor specific. Furthermore, that which is vis-
ible can be perceived by sight, that which is resonant
by hearing; in general, whatever is sensible can be
similarly perceived by the aid of some one sense, for
sensation, in and for itself, is devoid of reason, while
truth cannot be perceived without reason. Truth,
then, is not a sensible thing. Nor, again, is it intel-
ligible, for then no sensible thing would be true,
which is absurd. Further, it would then be either
intelligible for all at once or for some individuals
alone. But it is impossible that it should be known
by all simultaneously, nor is it known by some partic-
ular individual, for this is improbable and is, in fact,
the point at issue.
Lastly, truth is not at once both sensible and intel-
ligible. For if so, we shall have to say either that
everything sensible and everything intelligible is true
or else that not every sensible thing, but certain sen-
sible things, not everything intelligible, but certain in-
telligible things, are true. Now it cannot be said that
everything sensible and everything intelligible is true,
for sensible things are in contradiction with sensible
things and intelligible things with intelligible things
and reciprocally sensible things are in contradiction
with intelligible things and intelligibles with sensibles.
And it will be necessary, if all is true, that the same
thing both is and is not, is true and false at the same
382 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
time. Nor can it be that some of the sensible things
are true or some of the intelligible things, for that is
precisely the point at issue. Besides, it is logical to
say that all sensible things are either true or false, for
qua sensible they are all similar; one is not more sen-
sible, the other less so. And so, too, with things in-
telligible; they are all equally intelligible. Yet it is
absurd to say that every sensible thing or every in-
telligible thing is true. If, then, this reasoning holds,
truth does not exist.
This reasoning implies that truth and sensible
things and intelligible things in other words, the
qualities of being true, of being sensible, and of being
intelligible are severally realities. All three are re-
garded as positive and intrinsic properties possessed
by the objects that are called true or sensible or in-
telligible. Common speech and even the language of
philosophers lends support to such a view. The
Stoics actually defined truth as a corporeal thing, a
body. But upon reflection it will be seen that a thing
does not contain in itself the property of being true.
Two terms arenecessary, thethingwhichexists and the
thought to which it is presented. Aristotle had long
ago made this perfectly plain.
1
"Falsity and truth"
he says "are not in things, but in thought; it is not
as if the good were true and the bad were in itself
false. The cause, then, of that which is in the sense
of being true or false is an affection of thought; it is
related to the remaining genus of being and does not
indicate any separate class of being. That which is
in the sense ofbeing true or is not in the sense ofbeing
false depends on combination and separation. The
combination and the separation are in thought and
not in the things, and that which is in this sense is
E., IV, 1027, b. 18-33,
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 383
a different sort of
e
being* from the things that are
in the full sense. The true judgment affirms where
the subject and predicate really are combined and
denies where they are separated, while the false
judgment predicates the contradictory of this. We
think things together and apart in the sense that there
is no succession in the thought but they become a
unity." He went further, affirming that "in regard
to simple concepts and essences, falsity and truth do
not exist, even in thought." It is not surprising, then,
that after conceiving as a thing in itselfwhat can only
be conceived as a relation, the sceptic should end by
disproving its existence. It is quite certain that
truth does not exist ifwe mean a reality independent
of all thought. And the same thing may be said of
what is sensible and what is intelligible, for in these
terms, too, relations are implied. "But," the Sceptic
may reply, "whether a relation or a thing in itself is
meant makes little difference,
-
provided you grant
that where the relation expressed by the term sensible
is found there is also found the relation expressed by
the term truth. And this you do grant, if you say
that what is true is sensible, as you must do unless
you maintain that what is true is intelligible, and then
the same question will arise under a slightly different
form." Here we discern a second ambiguity. The
Sceptic takes in an absolute sense identities which
are only admitted in a partial or relative sense. We
admit without misgiving that what is true is either
sensible or intelligible. But what do we mean?
Simply that there are true things
1
which are either
sensible or intelligible. These two qualities, true and
sensible or true and intelligible can coexist in the
1The content or subjects of Aristotle's true thoughts, judgments or
propositions.
384 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
same object. A thing true under one aspect is sen-
sible under another, and both at once. The thing is
sensible, but it is not solely and essentially sensible;
it is sensible without losing its own nature; it is at
once, in Plato's words, the same as that which is
sensible and yet different from it. The Sceptic, how-
ever, takes the terms literally.
"You admit/' he will
say, "that the true is sensible; this means that what
is true and what is sensible are the same thing, or, in
your own language, that where the relation expressed
by the term true is found there we necessarily, also,
find the relation expressed by the term sensible/'
Thus, where we understand two things elsewhere
distinct are united and coexist in the same object and
are in this sense identical, he understands that they
form an absolute identity. According to him a
thing is not at once sensible and true, but because it is
sensible it is no longer true. He makes the bond
which unites the two terms analytic not synthetic.
1
This misconception of predication follows inevitably
when relations are confused with things in them-
selves. When the true and the sensible are taken
for things in themselves, to say that the one is the
other is to identify them completely and in essence.
A thing can have several relations with other things,
but it cannot be in itself several things. All sensible
things are sensible in virtue of one relation, and in
addition certain of them are in certain relations true
as well. To this the Sceptic demurs: "Logic re-
quires that all sensible things should be true or false,
since qua sensible they are all identical, one is not
more so than the other." This is the old plea which
1
Compare the remarks of Mr. G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica,
pp. 9-y##., on what he terms the "naturalistic fallacy," e. g,, since some-
thing else (pleasure) is good, ergo, good is that something else (pleasure).
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 385
loses its force when once it is understood that the
identity expressed in predication is not absolute but
partial and contingent.
^Enesidemus next treats of causality: "There is no
such thing as cause, for a body (corporeal thing) is not
the cause ofa corporeal thing. In fact, either this cor-
poreal thing is not generated, like the atom of Epi-
curus,or it is generated like ordinary bodies; it iseither
perceptible by the senses, like iron, or it is impercepti-
ble, like the atom; in both cases it can produce noth-
ing, for if it produces something it does so either by re-
maining in itselforbyunitingwithsomething else. But
by remaining in itself it can produce nothing but itself,
it can produce nothing that is not in its own nature.
Nor by uniting with something else can it any more
produce a third thingwhich did not exist before, for it
is not possible thatone should thus becometwo ortwo
become three. If one thing could thus become two,
each of the two units thus produced would, in its turn,
become two, and there would be four of them, and
then each of the four in its turn doubling itselfthere
would be eight units, and so ad infinitum. Now it is
quite absurd to say that from a unity there proceeds
an infinity ofthings, and it is no less absurd to say that
from a unity there arises a multiplicity. Again it is
absurd to say that from the union of a given number
of things there can arise a numerically greater num-
ber. For if one unit being added to another unit
produces a third unit, this latter by being added to
the former two will produce a fourth unit, this fourth
a fifth unit, and so ad infinitum. Thus we have
shown that body cannot be the cause of body; one
corporeal thing cannot produce another. By the
same reasoning, the non-corporeal cannot be the
cause of the non-corporeal, for plurality can never
386 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
come from unity, nor from a given plurality a numeri-
cally greater plurality. Further, what is not cor-
poreal, being incapable of contact, can neither do nor
suffer, neither act nor be acted upon. But again, just
as the incorporeal never generates the incorporeal, so
a body cannot produce what is not corporeal nor the
non-corporeal a body; for body does not contain in
itself the nature of the non-corporeal nor does the
non-corporeal contain in itself the nature of body.
Plane-tree never gives birth to horse, nor horse to
plane-tree, because the nature of horse is not in-
cluded in that of plane-tree; horse never gives birth
to man because the nature of man is not included
in that of horse. So, too, from body there never
arises the non-corporeal, because the nature ofwhat
is not corporeal is not in the nature of body. Con-
versely from the incorporeal there never arises body.
Nay, more, if one of the two were in the other it
will never be engendered by the other, for if each of
the two exists, it does not arise from the other, but
possesses reality already; being already existent it
cannot be generated, for by generation or becoming
is meant a process or advance toward being. Hence,
body not being the cause of the non-corporeal nor
the non-corporeal the cause ofbody,we conclude that
there is no such thing as cause."
l
This reasoning of JEnesidemus was completed by
the enumeration in the fifth book of his Pyrrhonean
Discourses of eight tropes
2
specially intended to
refute those who believed in the existence of causes.
The list as preserved by Sextus is couched in some-
1 Sextus Emp., Adv. Math., IX, 218-237; <f* Eiog- LaSrt, IX, 97-99.
Contrast the more cautious attitude of Sextus himself, Pyrrh., Hyp.,
Ill, 13-29.
8
Photius, Biblioth., 170, b, 17 &$.; Sextus Emp., Pyrrh. Hyp, I,
180-184.
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 387
what obscure terms. These eight tropes differ from
the ten tropes, both by their purpose, and the man-
ner of their presentation. jEnesidemus is not con-
cerned here to oppose to each other opinions ofequal
value which are contradictory, but merely to indicate
various modes of false reasoning about causes, so
that the word trope is employed in a new sense. The
list which ^Enesidemus gives is, truth to say, a list
of sophisms, of errors perpetrated in the search for
causes. Among such errors the eight which follow
are conspicuous: (i) Resorting to a causewhich is not
evident and which is not attested by another thing
which can be called evident; (2) stopping short at
one single reason, when we have the choice of several
good explanations equally plausible; (3) when things
follow in a regular order, calling in causes which dis-
regard this order; (4) supposing that the things
which we do not see come about like the things which
we do see, although theymay conceivably come about
otherwise; (5) explaining everything, as most philos-
ophers have done, by the aid of elements which they
have assumed instead of following the common no-
tions admitted by everybody; (6) disregarding, as
many philosophers do, all causes but those which
conform to their own hypotheses, and passing over
in silence thosewhich are contrary tothesehypotheses,
in spite of the fact that these latter causes are also
probable; (7) calling in causes which are contrary
not only to appearances but even to principles pre-
viously adopted; (8) employing for the explanation
of doubtful things causes equally doubtful. ^Enesi-
demus went on to remark that it can happen that in
affirming causes philosophers have been mistaken in
various other ways which may be subsumed under
those already given.
388 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
Again we pause to make a few obvious comments.
It is hardly necessary to point out that the idea of
cause, when analysed, is easily seen to imply a re-
lation, and that in a twofold aspect. A thing can
only be conceived as cause in relation to its effects.
^Enesidemus seems not to have touched on this
point, and the later Sceptics hardly realised it.
Again the act of thought by which a thing is
known in itself is not the same as that by which
it is known as a cause. The thing is at first con-
ceived in itself in its essence; then it is looked upon
as a cause; causality is a relation which is super-
added to the idea that we have of the thing without
destroying it and without being confounded with it.
But the Sceptic does not take it so. Here again,
authorised, we must admit, by language and by
custom, he considers causality as a real objective
quality belonging to the thing; he makes of it a thing
in itself. Further, this property is identified with
the thing itself in which it is suppposed to exist; do
we not say that one thing is the cause of another ?
And, consequently, if a thing is a cause, it is so ab-
solutely and by its essence in its intimate nature.
Once this is done it becomes necessary to compre-
hend how this determinate essence can produce some-
thing other than itself. But the question so stated
is absurd. A thing once given and defined in its
essence can only remain what it is. To say it is a
cause is to say that it is something other than itself;
this would be a contradiction. In modern parlance,
from the idea ofa thing will never be derived, analyt-
ically, the idea of something else, and this remains
true if in place ofa single essence we consider several
united in juxtaposition. In other words, as Hume
and Kant have shown, causality is a synthetic rela-
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 389
tion. The two terms posited as cause and effect are
not given to our thought as identical, but only as
having a certain connection under a category, sui
generis, which we call causality. ^Enesidemus un-
derstood this, and this is why it is right to see in him
a precursor of Hume and Kant. We are in a posi-
tion now to determine what truth and falsehood the
reasoning of ^Enesidemus contained. So long as a
cause is considered as a thing in itself his reasoning
is unassailable. It loses all validity the moment we
consider a cause as a relation established by thought
between different objects. Such a relation connects
the objects without modifying their true nature.
They are at first what they are in themselves, and be-
sides this they are looked upon as connected with
other things by certain laws. If this much be pre-
mised, there is no contradiction; in this way, what is
corporeal may be connected with what is corporeal,
what is incorporeal with what is incorporeal; we may
even consider the corporeal as the cause of the in-
corporeal, the incorporeal as the cause of the cor-
poreal.
But ^Enesidemus was not content with disproving
the existence of cause. He attacked the doctrine of
signs, which in his day was the recognised method
of research and scientific discovery. Ignorance of
cause may debar us from the direct method of ex-
planation, from descending from the cause to the
effects; but is not an indirect method possible, may
we not ascend from effects to causes ? Such a method
implies that certain phenomena, the effects, are signs,
and certain others, the causes, are the things signified
by these signs. Ratiocination would then be the
means which the mind possesses for rising to the ex-
planation of things. Such was precisely the thesis
390 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of both the Stoics and Epicureans which ^Eneside-
mus undertook to overthrow. According to Photius,
1
JEnesidemus, in the fourth book of his treatise, de-
clared that there are no visible signs which disclose
invisible things, and those who believe in their exist-
ence are the dupes of a vain illusion. This testimony
is confirmed by a more explicit passage in Sextus.
2
If phenomena appear in the same way to all ob-
servers who are similarly constituted, and if, further,
signs are phenomena, then the signs must appear in
the same way to all observers similarly constituted.
This hypothetical proposition is self-evident; if the
antecedent be granted the consequent follows. Now,
continues Sextus, (i) phenomena do appear in the
same way to all observers similarly constituted. But
(2) signs do not appear in the same way to all ob-
servers similarly constituted. The truth of propo-
sition (i) rests upon observation, for though, to the
jaundiced or bloodshot eye, white objects do not
appear white, yet to the normal eye, i. e., to all ob-
servers similarly constituted, white objects invariably
do appear white. For the truth ofproposition (2) the
art of medicine furnishes decisive instances. The
symptoms of fever, the flush, the moisture of the
skin, the high temperature, the rapid pulse, when ob-
served by doctors of the like mental constitution, are
not interpreted by them in the same way. Here
Sextus cites some of the conflicting theories main-
tained by the authorities of his age. In these symp-
toms Herophilus sees a mark of the good quality of
the blood; for Erasistratus they are a sign of the
passage of the blood from the veins to the arteries;
for Asclepiades they prove, too great tension of
corpuscles in interspaces, although both corpuscles
l Biblioth.t 170, b. 12, * Adv. Math., VIII, 21$ sqq.
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 391
and interspaces, being infinitesimally small, cannot
be perceived by sense but only apprehended by the
intellect. Sextus, having borrowed this argument
from .ZEnesidemus, has developed it in his own fash-
ion, and is probably himself responsible for the
medical instances which he has selected. He uses it
to establish that signs are not, as the Epicureans
maintain, sensible things. From his first hypotheti-
cal proposition, coupled with propositions (i) and (2),
Sextus infers that signs are not phenomena. We
have no right, then, to call any phenomenon a sign,
and, if this be so, reasoning from effects to causes
is invalid.
It remains, then, to prove that neither do they
belong to the domain of things intelligible, as was the
view of the Stoics; in other words, that they cannot
be apprehended by reason or intellect. This proof
Sextus undertakes to furnish. But there is no evi-
dence that .ZEnesidemus himself ever dreamed of
doing so. He must have confined himself to demon-
strating that there are no "signs" in the sense of
things visible disclosing what is invisible, L e., no
signs among sensible things; or, in the words of
Photius, "There are no signs, manifest and obvious,
of what is obscure and latent." Sextus himself re-
minds us that he has slightly modified the argument
of ^Enesidemus by taking the term phenomena, or
appearances,as the equivalent ofsensiblephenomena,
appearances to sense.
1
It is highly improbable that
^Enesidemus had already made the distinciton famil-
iar to the later Sceptics between two classes of signs.
According to Sextus,
2
there are signs which act, as we
1 Adv. Math., VIII, 216.
a
Pyrrh. Hyp., II, 100 ; cf. the context, 99-102 ; Adv. Math., VIII,
148-158.
392 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
should say, by the law of association, reminding us
that in past experience two phenomena were con-
joined, as smoke with fire, a scar with a wound, a
stab to the heart with subsequent death. If after-
ward one of the two phenomena is temporarily
obscured and passes out of immediate consciousness,
the other, if present, may serve to recall it; we are
justified in calling the one which is present a sign, and
the other, which is temporarily absent, the thing
signified. With tlie term "sign," as thus understood,
the sign commemorative or reminiscent, Sextus has
no quarrel. By its aid prediction is justified; we can
infer fire from smoke, the wound from the scar, ap-
proaching death from the fatal stab, for in all these
cases we proceed upon past experience. Sextus re-
serves his hostility for another class of signs which
we may call the sign demonstrative. When one of
the two phenomena assumed to be the thing signified
never has occurred in actual experience, but belongs
wholly, by its own nature, to the region of the un-
known, the dogmatists nevertheless maintained that,
if certain conditions were fulfilled, its existence was
indicated anddemonstratedby the otherphenomenon,
which they called the sign. For instance, according
to the dogmatists, the movements of the body indi-
cate and demonstrate the existence of the soul; they
are its sign. It is "sign," then, in this latter sense,
the indicative or demonstrative sign, whose existence
Sextus disputes and undertakes to refute. To make
this distinction implies a clear grasp of the method of
observation as opposed to the logical or dialectical
method, in short, to the high priori road. His eight
tropes incline us to credit ^Enesidemus with a scien-
tific turn of mind. They show a tendency to inter-
pret the data of experience impartially, without pre-
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 393
conceived ideas. And yet, as we have seen, they are,
after all, the work of a logician rather than of an ob-
server of nature; nor is there any extant authority to
warrant us in attributing the distinction in question
to ^Enesidemus rather than to Sextus. The distinc-
tion which ^Enesidemus undoubtedly made between
signs presented to sense and signs presented to intel-
lect is not the same as that made by Sextus between
signs commemorative and signs demonstrative, for
the Epicureans, who admitted none but signs pre-
sented to sense, nevertheless believed in the possibility
of the inductive leap, as we should call it, from the
known to the unknown. Indeed, there are extant
fragments of a treatise on signs and inference by
Philodemus, a later Epicurean, which are interesting
because the inferential method recommended bears
a distinct analogy to that of modern inductive logic.
The foregoing considerations are apparently con-
firmed by passages in Sextus where he seems to have
followed ^Enesidemus and to have inadvertently ad-
duced as a demonstrative sign one which upon ex-
amination turns out to be unmistakably a sign be-
longing to the other class.
1
The theory ofsigns, so far aswe have good evidence
for attributing it to j3nesidemus, comes to very
little. It is manifestly incomplete. Some, indeed,
have seen in it nothing more than a particular form of
the tenth trope. Others, however, are inclined to
believe it had for j5nesidemus a wider bearing, and
to see in him a precursor of J. S. Mill, if, indeed, he
is to be credited with the arguments adduced by
Sextus. When he is treating of reminiscent signs
Sextus does, indeed, describe induction in terms not
unworthy ofMill. The reminiscent sign is a phenom-
1
Pyrrh. Hyp., II, 106; Adv. Math., VIII, 252.
394 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
enonwhich has been clearlyobserved at the same time
as the thing ofwhich it is a sign. If it presents itself
again after the latter has been obscured, it reminds
us of the thing which was observed simultaneously
with itself, but is no longer actually in evidence; thus
smoke makes us think of fire. We have often seen
these two phenomena together or coexisting; as soon
as we perceive one of them, memory suggests to us
the idea ofthe other, namely, the fire notnow actually
visible. So, too, with the scar which shows after the
wound and the stab to the heart which is followed
by death. On the sight ofthe scar, memory suggests
to us the wound which preceded it; on seeing a man
stabbed in the heart, we predict his approaching
death. What the Sceptic combats is the theory of
demonstrative signs, that is to say, the theory accord-
ing to which there is a necessary and constant con-
nection between phenomena, a causal nexus such, in
short, as is still maintained by dogmatists to-day.
It is agreed that from their own point of view the
sceptical arguments are unassailable. If we adhere
to the data of experience, to phenomena alone, it is
impossible to see in induction anything else than an
association of ideas founded on habit and, like it,
variable. Thus Mill, while trying to establish his
scientific theory of induction, admits that induction
cannot be absolutely valid. It only holds for our
world, and theremay be systems in which phenomena
are not submitted to any laws or uniformities. We
do not claim that ^Enesidemus got as far as that;
there is nothing in the Greek texts to authorise such
a statement. He stopped short ofexplaining in what
sense and how far there can be such
,
a thing as ex-
perimental science without the casual nexus. But
he understood and proved that there is no such thing
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 395
as science in the absolute sense of the dogmatists.
There is, indeed, no science, no demonstration, unless
ideas are linked together by a necessary band or
connection, but there is no true necessity unless re-
lation can be rationally determined or, in modern
parlance, determined a priori. Now, given a fact,
or, as the Stoics call it, a sign, let us try to determine
a priori the nature of the thing signified. Here, just
as when we were dealing with cause, it is obvious
that we never can succeed, and ifwe never succeed,
there will be no demonstration. This is whatJnesi-
demus meant, and he is unanswerable.
We can now assign -ZEnesidemus his place in the
sceptical school. Sextus seems to oppose him to the
later Sceptics, ofwhom Agripjpa appears to have been
one of the first. His originality cannot be seriously
questioned. It was he who really resuscitated
Pyrrhonism, and in the main it retained the form he
gave it, though some modifications were bound to
occur in the course of two centuries. ^Enesidemus
distinguished himself as a dialectician. Metaphys-
ical paradoxes and dialectical subtleties at once too
absurd for refutation and impossible to refute were
his stock-in-trade. If there was any proposition
which he withdrew from universal doubt, it was the
dictum ofHeraclitus, the identity of all contradictions
in the absolute, which is a metaphysical and tran-
scendental thesis. But before making an imputation
so gravely affecting his consistency as a Sceptic, we
ought to be sure of our ground. Sextus, who care-
fully distinguished scepticism from systems which
might be confused with it, starts with that of Her-
aclitus. In the course of his remarks he makes the
plain statement that ^Enesidemus and his followers
declared scepticism to be a path to the philosophy
396 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
of Heraclitus. There are other passages in which
Sextus mentions, usually without indorsing them,
opinions of ^Enesidemus, such as that time is real,
the primary corporeal thing, or to be identified with
air; that phenomena are of two kinds, specific and
generic; that motion may be divided into spatial and
qualitative, that thought or intellect is "outside" or
independent of the body.
1
Some of these opinions
are ascribed by Sextus to JEnesidemus "according to
Heraclitus," a phrase which hardly suggests that the
opinion in question belonged properly to Heraclitus
and was disowned by ^Enesidemus as it would be by
Sextus himself.
Some scholars, indeed, refuse to accept the plain
statement of Sextus, and think the whole difficulty
may be removed by the assumption of a misconcep-
tion on his part. But it is very unlikely that Sextus
failed to distinguish the opinions of Heraclitus
reported by ^Enesidemus from those of ^Eneside-
mus himself, whereas, if the Pyrrhonean Sceptic
who had broken with the Academy did in the end
himself follow the path to Heraclitus, his opinions at
this stage of his philosophic development could be
conveniently cited as those of "j^Enesidemus accord-
ing to Heraclitus." A further question remains.
Were these opinions put forward dogmatically, or did
^Enesidemus by becoming a Heraclitean still not
cease to be a sceptic and put them forward merely
as what appeared to him ? In the absence of further
evidence the question can hardly be decided. But
it is at all events easy to discriminate him from his
successors. Theywere for the most part, aswe have
seen, medical men. To speculation, which they de-
1
Pyrrh. Hyp,, III, 17; Adv. Math., X, 233; #. VIII, 8; *&., X, 38;
*&., XII, 349-
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 397
clared futile, they opposed their art, a practical
science,whichthey heldto be legitimate andnecessary.
Scepticism was an end in itself to ^Enesidemus; his
successors made of it an introduction to the medical
art. If later Sceptics believed in anything it was
solely in empirical sequences ofphenomena discover-
able by observation apart from any theory. In this
direction ^Enesidemus influenced them but little.
If he was a metaphysician they tended to become
positivists. But again there is no evidence that they
ever actually took this decisive step. Coexistences
and sequences of phenomena might be to them all
thatwe can know, but they still talked glibly ofthings
in themselves, in the very act of refusing their assent
to them. The function ofthorough-going scepticism
is invariably critical, though the Sceptics themselves
seldom see this If Hume's scepticism was, as Kant
supposed, a reductio ad alsurdum of thorough-going
empiricism, it may also be said that the scepticism of
the Pyrrhonists was a reductio ad absurdum of those
assumptions of crude realism and materialistic em-
piricism which were the common property of all the
post-Aristotelian schools which the Sceptics them-
selves shared with their opponents the Stoics and
Epicureans. In justice, however, to the Sceptics we
must defend them from the charge of inconsistency
so frequently brought against them by modern critics.
How, it is asked, can universal doubt be reconciled
with the attitude of practical men taking part in
everyday life. The answer given by Sextus is clear
and explicit. The Pyrrhonist does not deny phe-
nomena, for they are the only criterion by which he
can regulate action, and inactivity implies death.
In his daily life he sometimes obeys the guidance of
nature, at other times the compulsion of his feelings;
398 STOIC AND EPICUREAN
sometimes the tradition oflaws and customs, at others
the teaching of the arts. But in all these ways he is
merely following appearances or phenomena.
1
This
attitude has been wittily described as the philosophy
of the dinner-bell, and it is easy to sneer at Sextus
for not comprehending the effects of his own work as
a whole or realising that in the attempt to subvert all
established principles hewas cuttingaway theground
on which he stood. The critics have not really
thought out the sceptical position. They have not
faced the consequences of general uncertainty. The
calmness and self-possession ofthe Pyrrhonist favours
the inference that he considered his own attitude
reasonable, as if in a world of unreason and a chaos
of unrelated phenomena there could be such a thing
as a reasonable attitude. He might fairly be charged
with inconsistency if he admitted consistency in ex-
perience and in the universe. But this is just what
he declines to affirm.
Upon this charge let Hume, the greatest of scep-
tics, answer for his brethren of antiquity. He has
told us that it is only by forgetting his own argu-
ments that he can recover cheerfulness. "Most for-
tunately it happens, that since reason is incapable of
dispelling these clouds, nature herself suffices to that
purpose, and cures me of this philosophical melan-
choly and delirium, either by relaxing this bent of
mind, or by some avocation and lively impression of
my senses,which obliterates allthese chimeras. ... I
may, nay I must yield to the currentofnature in sub-
mitting to my senses and understanding; and in this
blind submission I show most perfectly my sceptical
disposition and principles. But does it follow that
I must strive against the current of nature, which
1 Sextus Erap, Pyrrh. Hyp., I, 33, 24,
THE REVIVAL OF PYRRHONISM 399
leads me to indolence and pleasure;
. . . and that
I must torture my brains with subtilities and sophis-
tries, at the very time that I cannot satisfy myself
concerning the reasonableness of so painful an ap-
plication, nor have any tolerable prospect of arriving
by its means at truth and certainty ? . . . These are
the sentiments ofmy spleen and indolence; and, in-
deed, I must confess that philosophy has nothing to
oppose to them, and expects a victory more from the
returns of a serious, good-humour'd disposition than
from the force of reason and conviction. In all the
incidents of life we ought still to preserve our scepti-
cism. If we believe that fire warms or water re-
freshes, 'tis only because it costs us too much pains
to think otherwise. Nay, if we are philosophers, it
ought only to be on sceptical principles, and from an
inclination which we feel to the employing ourselves
after that manner."
*
This is the attitude of the
ancient Sceptic, and the fact that othermen denounce
it as irrational or inconsistent is part of its justifi-
cation.
1 Treatise ofHuman Nature, Bk. I, Pt. IV, sub fin. (Works, ed. Green
and Grose. Vol. I, p. 548 sqq.)
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
For the Stoics the general reader may consult:
Grant, A. The Ancient Stoics. Essay VI, prefixed to The Ethics
of Aristotle. London (1856), 4th ed., 1884.
Long, G. The Thoughts of the Emperor M. Aurelius Antoninus.
London (1862), 1886.
Long, G. The Discourses of Epictetus, with the Encheiridion and
Fragments. Translated with a Life of Epictetus and a view of
his philosophy. London (1877), 1891.
Kendall, G. H. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus to Himself; an Eng-
lish Translation with Introductory Study of Stoicism and the
Last of the Stoics. London, 1898.
Martha, C. Les moralistes sous Pempire romain, philosophes et
poetes. Paris (1864), 1881.
Dill, S. Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius. London,
1904.
For the Epicureans:
Wallace, W. Epicureanism. London, 1880.
Martha, C. Le poeme de Lucrece, morale, religion, science.
Paris, 1869.
Masson, J. Lucretius, Epicurean and Poet. London: Murray,
1907, andA Complementary Volume, 1909,
Munro, H. A. J. Translation of Lucretius. New edition. Lon-
don: Bell, 1908.
The following list of books has been drawn up for the use of
those who make this epoch of philosophy a special study:
I. INDISPENSABLE COLLECTIONS OF MATERIAL
Pearson, A. C. TheFragments of Zeno and Cleanthes, with Intro-
duction and Explanatory Notes. London, 1891. [The
introduction to the Stoics.]
40X
402 SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Von Arnim, J. Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta. Vol. I, Zeno et
Zenonis discipuli, 1905. Vol. II, Chrysippi fragmenta logica
et physica, 1903 Vol. Ill, Chrysippi fragmenta moralia.
Fragmenta successorum Chrysippi, 1903. Leipzig, Teubner.
Diels, H. Doxographi Graeci. Berolini, 1879.
Stobaeus. Anthologii Libri Duo Priores qui inscribi solent Eclogse
Physicse et Ethicse, recc. Wachsmuth et Hense. Berolini, apud
Weidmannos, 1884.
Usener, H. Epicurea. [The first edition out of print.] Lipsiae:
Teubner, 1887.
II. WORKS OF REFERENCE
Bonhoffer, A. Epictet und die Stoa. Untersuchungen zur stois-
chen Philosophic. Stuttgart, 1890.
Bonh'offer, A. Die Ethik des Stoikers Epictet. Anhang: Exkurse
iiber einige wichtige Punkte der stoischen Ethik. Stuttgart,
1894.
Brochard, V. Les Sceptiques grecs. Paris, 1887.
Dyroff, A. Die Ethik der alten Stoa. Berlin, 1897.
Guyau, M. La Morale d
j
Epicure et ses rapports avec les doctrines
contemporaines, Paris, 1878.
Heinze, M. Die Lehre vom Logos in der griechischen Philosophic,
Oldenburg, 1872.
Hirzel, R. Untersuchungen zur Cicero's philosophischen Schriften.
3 vols. Leipzig, 1882. The second volume has for subtitle:
Die Entwicklung der stoischen Philosophic.
Krische, A. B. Forschungen auf dem Gebiete der alten Philoso-
phic, I. Bd. Die theologischen Lehren der griechischen Den-
ker. Eine Priifung der Darstellung,Cicero's. Gottingen, 1840.
^Maccoll, N. The Greek Sceptics. London: Macmillan, 1869.
xMasson, J. The Atomic Theory of Lucretius, London, 1884,
Natorp, P. Forschungen zur Geschichte des Erkenntnissproblems
im Alterthum, Protagoras, Demokrit, Epikur und die Skepsis,
Berlin, 1884.
Ogereau, F. Essai sur le systeme philosophique des Stoiciens.
Paris, 1885,
Patrick, M. M. Sextus Empiricus and Greek Scepticism. Lon-
don: Bell, 1899.
Ravaisson, F. Essai sur le stoicisme. Paris, 1856.
Saisset, E. Aene'sideme. Paris, 1840,
Schmekel, A, Die Philosophic der mittleren Stoa in ihrem ge-
schichtlichen Zusammenhange. Berlin, 1892,
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 403
Siebeck, H. Die Umbildung der peripatetischen Naturphilosophie
in die der Stoiker. (In Untersuchungen zur Philosophic der
Griechen. Zweite, rieu bearbeitete und vermehrte Auflage.)
2 ed. Freiburg, i. B., 1888.
Stein, L. Die Psychologic der Stoa. i Band. Metaphysisch-
anthropologischer Theil. Berlin, 1886. (Berliner Studien fur
klassische Philologie und Archaologie. 3 Band.)
Stein, L. Die Erkentnisstheorie der Stoa (2 Band der Psycholo-
gie). Berlin, 1888. (Berliner Studien, 7 Band.)
Wilamovitz-Mollendorff, U. v. Antigonos von Karystos. (Phi-
lologische Untersuchungen von Kiessling und Wilamovitz-
Mollendorff, 4 Heft). Berlin: Weidmann, 1881.
Woltjer, J. Lucretii Philosophia cum fontibus comparata. Spe-
cimen Litterarum quo inquiritur quatemus Epicuri Philoso-
phiam tradiderit Lucretius. Groningae, 1877.
Zeller, E. Nacharistotelische Philosophic I. (Philosophic der
Griechen III, i.) Vierte Auflage. Leipzig, 1909. [This pos-
thumous edition appeared too late for use in the presentvolume.]
ni. EDITIONS
Seneca. Texts of the Epistles, by Hense, Leipzig, Teubner, 1898,
and the Naturales Quaestiones, by Gercke, 1907.
Epictetus (transcribed by Arrian). Textby Schenkl, Lipsiae, 1894.
The last complete annotated edition is: Epicteteae Philosophies
monumenta ad Codd. Mss. fidem recensuit, Latina versione
adnotationibus, indicibusque illustravit lo. Schweighauser.
5 Tom. Lipsiae, 1799-1800. [The last two of the five volumes
contain the Commentary of Simplicius on the Encheiridion.]
M. Aurelius Antoninus. Textby Stich, Lipsiae, 1882. Gataker's
valuable edition has for title: Marci Antonini Imperatoris de
rebus suis, sive de eis quae ad se pertinere censebat, Libri XII,
Locishaud paucis repurgati, suppleti, restituti: Versione insuper
Latini nova; Lectionibus item variis, Locisque parallelis ad
marginem adjectis; Ac Commentario perpetuo, explicati atque
illustrati; Studio operaque Thomae Gatakeri, Londinatis,
Cantabrigiae, 1652.
Cicero. De Finibus. By J. N, Madvig. Editio altera. Hauniae,
1869.
De Natura Deorum, By J. B. Mayor. 3 vols. Cambridge,
(Eng.), 1880.
Academica. By J. S, Reid. London: Macmillan, 1885.
De Offidis, By H. A. Holden, Cambridge (Eng.), 1886.
404 SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Plutarch. The Four Tracts: De Stoicorum Repugnantiis; De
Communibus Notitiis adversus Stoicos; Non posse suaviter
vivere secundum Epicurum; Adversus Coloten; in Wytten-
bach's edition of the Moralia, Qxonii, 1795 (Lipsiae, 1796).
Timon. Sillographorum Graecorum Reliquiae. Recogn. et enarrav.
Curtius Wachsmuth. Prsecedit commentatio de Timone
Phliasio ceterisque sillographis. Lipsiae, 1885.
Sextus Empiricus. Opera Grace et Latine. Notas addidit J. A.
Fabricius. 2 vols, Lipsise, 1718. Editio emendatior, Lipsiae,
Kuhn, 1840-1841.
Galen. De Placitis Hippocratis et Platonis libri novem. Text by
Ivan Miiller. Lipsiae, 1874.
Metrodorus. Metrodori Epicurei Fragmenta collegit A. KSrte.
Leipzig, 1890. (In Jahrbticher f. classische Philologie, Sup-
plementband XVII, pp. 529-597.)
Lucretius. With Notes and a Translation, by H. A. J. Munro.
Fourth edition finally revised. Cambridge (Eng.), 1886.
Revisione del Testo, Commento e Studi Introduttivi di Carlo
Giussani. 4 vols. Torino, 1896-1898. Also a Supple-
ment, Note Lucreziane. Torino, 1900, [It is to be hoped
that this edition will appear in an English dress,]
Edited by W. A. Merrill, Ph.D., New York, American Book
Company, 1907.
Diogenes of CEnoanda. Diogenis (Enoandensis Fragmenta or-
dinavit et explicavit Johannes William. Lipsiae, 1907,
INDEX
Academy,New or Sceptical, 7, 340,
35i, 359> 369, 375, 379; gener-
ally, 3I7-3S8.
Academy, Old, 317, 349, 357-
Accident, non-essential quality,
221, 241, 242, 270-272.
^Enesidemus, 373 note, 374~3975
writings, 375; probable date,
375> 376.
Agrippa, Pyrrhonean Sceptic, his
five tropes, 379.
Alcmaeon of Croton, 62.
Alexander of Abonuteichos, 308.
Alexander the Great, 3, 314.
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, 19,
204, 219, 283, 306; refuted by
Epicurus, 244, ; cited, 244, 245.
Anaxarchus, 314.
Anaximenes of Miletus cited, 20.
Anima in Lucretius, 267, 268.
Animus or mens, in Lucretius, 267,
268.
Antigonus Gonatas, king of Mace-
donia, 5.
Antiochus of Ascalon, Eclectic,
356~358> 375- , , J
.
Antipater of Tarsus, sixth head of
Stoic school, 326, 360, 361.
Antisthenes, founder of the Cynic
school, 88.
Apollonius of Cyrene, Megarian
philosopher, 320 note.
Appetitus, 66.
Aratus of Soli, pupil of Zeno, au-
thor of an astronomical poem,
6, 14-
Arcesilas of Pitane, 317-323, 375.
Archedemus, eclectic Stoic, HI,
112, 361.
Aristippus, 164, 165, 210.
Aristo of Chios, heterodox pupil of
Zeno, 6, 90, 368; cited, 86.
Aristocles, 314, 317.
Aristotle, his dualism and trans-
cendent First Cause, 19, 20, 22,
39> 338; his influence on the
Stoics, 13, 28, 32, 41, 62; criti-
cised by Chrysippus, 54; his
ten categories revised by the
Stoics, 56; contrast between
them in psychology, 64, 65, 105,
points of contact with Stoic
ethics, 3, 91, 112; general, 205,
213, 256, 258, 272, 283, 311, 323,
337 349* 353. 357, 3^2.
Aristotle, works formerly ascribed
to De Lineis Insecabilibus, 212;
De MundOj 354; De Virtutibus
et Vitiist De Affectibus, 355;
his Ethics cited, 54, 112, 164.
Aristoxenus, 267.
Arrian, published Discourses and
Encheiridion of Epictetus, 113,
124.
Asclepiades, physician, 390.
Assent, 64, 65, 72, 73, 315, 318,
344, 346.
Atom, meaning of, 220; of Demo-
critus, 207; of Epicurus, 24, 25;
terms for, 220, 221; how de-
scribed, 218, 222; shapes, 223;
motion of; 224-227, 255-264;
systems ofatoms, 233; unchange-
able qualities, 240-242; mini-
mal parts or minima, 248-251;
declination, 255-264, 345. t
Atomic theoryofLeucippus unpop-
ular in antiquity, 205; adopted
by Epicurus, 207.
Atomists, 174, 219, 256; problems
of, 204; their materialism, 205,
206; contrasted with Eleatics,
207; theory of hearing, 239.
Atticus, an Epicurean, 307.
405
406 INDEX
Berkeley, 246, 247.
Body, how defined by Stoics, 23;
sole reality, 23, 60, 206; am-
biguous in Epicurus and Lu-
cretius, 220, 221, argument of
Carneades, 331.
Boethus, heterodox Stoic, 361,
364-
Bronte, Emily, cited, 17.
Buddhists, 166, 167.
Butler, 347.
Callipho, 349,
Canon of induction, Epicurean,
216, 220, 238, 255, 259.
Canonic of Epicurus, 213.
Carneades of Cyrene, head of
Sceptical Academy, 41, 322-352,
354-356, 359-361, 364, 369, 373,
375-
Cassius, Epicurean, 307.
Cato, typical Stoic, 18; his suicide,
101; revered by later Stoics, 88,
369-
Causality, arguments of ^Enesi-
demus upon, 385-389.
Cause, with Stoics always efficient
cause, 23; primary and sub-
sidiary distinguished, 345.
Christian teaching, compared with
Stoic as to virtue, 87; moral
progress, 119; slavery, 144.
Chrysippus of Soli, pupil and suc-
cessor of Cleanthes, 7, 8, 28, 54,
77,85, 1 10, 322, 323, 325>3283
329) 33i 335 345, 35 3^0,
3?x, 363* 364, 3^8; fragments
cited, 30, 44,^ 45, 46; his views
on moral evil, 42-46; innova-
tions in logic, 56; definition of
reason, 66; account of presen-
tation, 69; of the criterion of
truth, 70, 71; authority for the
ethical summary of Diogenes
LaSrtius, 78; views on moral
progress, 88, 95; on emotion, 109.
Cicero, 18, 82, 158, 159, 307,3x5-
317, 3?7> 3^5) 366, 375) 37^; %
his
rendering of Greek technical
terms, 63, 66, 93; objection to the
Stoic ethical theory, 83; cited,
72, 80, 99, 100, 288, 290, 292,
358-360.
Cleanthes of Assos, pupil and suc-
cessor of Zeno, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 28,
61, 77, 96, in, 136, 140, 338,
346, 368; his Hymn to Zeus,
14-18; fragments cited, 76, 89.
Cleomedes, Stoic writer on astron-
omy, 14, 210.
Cleomenes, king of Sparta, 6.
Clitomachus (Hasdrubal) of Car-
thage, successor of Carneades,
322, 324, 340, 349, 356, 358, 373>
375-
Comte, 159.
Coniunctum (see Property), 241,
242, 270.
Consensusgentium, argumentfrom,
327- .
Copernicus, 32.
Cosmogony, Stoic, 30-38; earlier
Atomists, 256; of Epicurus, 228,
229, 255-262, 274, 275.
Cosmology, Stoic, 22-30, 32.
Cosmopolitanism, Stoic, 9, 140-
143-
Grantor, Academic, 320, 357.
Crates, Academic, 357.
Crates, the Cynic, teacher of Zeno,
Criterion, of truth and error, to the
Stoics, 69-73; to Epicurus, 188,
213-218, 237, 238; objections of
Arcesilas, 317-320; of Car-
neades, 324; of Philo and An-
tiochus, 356, 357.
Cynics, precursors of Stoics, 9;
nominalists, 22 ; points of diver-
gence from Stoics, 10, 90, 97.
Cyrenaics, followers of Aristippus,
164, 210, 348.
Daemon, 78.
Daemons (superhuman beings),
285-287.
Dalton, 204,
Dante, 32.
Darwin, 42.
Decimation of the atom, 255-264,
345-
Demetrius Poliorcetes, 5,
Democritus, 26; his doctrine of
natural necessity, 19, 22, 174,
2oi 359, 261; inherited by
Stoics, 174; his ethical teaching,
INDEX 407
167, 316; theory of vision, 235;
of hearing, 239; on size ofatoms,
242; atoms and void, 282; did
not distinguish between soul and
mind, 283, fragment cited by
Stobseus, 284; his doctrine of
superhuman dasmons, 285, 286;
how modified by Epicurus, 287;
other notices 20, 22, 206, 207,
229, 230, 242, 244, 256-259.
Design, argument from, 41, 329,
337-
Desire, howconceived by Epicurus,
165, 166.
Destiny, Stoic, 26, 76; distin-
guished from necessity, 173, 344,
345-
Determinism, Stoic, 344, 345; re-
jected by Epicurus, 172, 173,
260.
Dicsearchus, 267.
Diodorus Cronus, Megarian phil-
osopher, 5, 320 note.
Diodorus of Tyre, Eclectic Peri-
patetic, 349.
Diogenes Laertius cited, 78.
Diogenes of OEnoanda, Epicurean,
309-311; cited, 189, 190, 310.
Diogenes of Sinope, Cynic, 88, 129.
Diogenes the Babylonian, fifth
head of Stoic school, 322, 360,
361.
Dionysius of Heraclea, herterodox
pupil of Zeno, 6.
Discourses of Epictetus cited, 114,
118, 126, 128, 129, I34~I3<5, 139,
140, 145-
Disease, 43-45> 5-
Divination, upheld by Stoics, 41,
327* 335, 345J rejected by Epicu-
rus, 301; attacked by Carneades,
327, 328; abandoned by Panse-
tius, 364; revived by Posido-
nius, 367.
Duty, Stoic theory of, 93-98; as
exhibited by later Stoics, 98,
125-151; modern notion of, how
evolved, 93.
Eclecticism, 351, 353"370.
Eleatics contrasted with Atomists,
206, 207.
Eliot, George, 156.
Emanations (effluxes, films, husks,
idols, images, outlines), accord-
ing to Empedocles, Democritus,
and Epicurus, 229-23,3; their
velocity, 232-234, efficient causes
of sensation and thought, 235-
240. ,
Emotions (affections, passions) ,
Stoic doctrine of, 102-110; view
of Posidonius, 367.
Empedocles, 204, 205, 219, 229,
230, 239; his theory of vision,
236; of hearing, 239; cited, 236.
Encheiridion of Epictetus cited,
119, 124, 131-133* r4&
End, of action, the ethical, as con-
ceived by the Stoics, 74-85; by
Epicurus, 163-173; view of
Pyrrho, 316; classification of
Carneades, 347-351-
Epictetus, of Hierapolis, 14, 18,
39, 68, 88, 89, 113, 127, 141, 146,
150, 151, 360, 368; his definition
of the ethical end, 76; threefold
division of actions, 98; views on
suicide, 101; on pleasure, in;
on piety, 133-137; his three
stages of instruction and disci-
pline, 121-125; his ideal mis-
sionary or "Cynic," 129, 138.
See also Discourses and Enchei-
ridion.
Epicureans, 7, 8, 60, 116, 134,
161, 162, 175, 178, 180, 181, 196,
208, 304-308, 3i$> 327, 35o5 354,
360, 369, 390, 391, 393-
Epicurus, 153-302; letter toMen-
ceceus, 161, 167-173, 260, 289,
291, 298; to Herodotus, 161, 219
-280; golden.'maxims, 161, 182-
189, 214; fragments cited, 156,
159, 160, 190-197; other notices,
24, 25, 40, 41, 43, i> *33j I39
3 6> 327, 328, 340, 345, 346, 348,
359,368.
Epistemology, Stoic, 00-73; Epi-
curean, 188, 213-218, 237, 238.
Erasistratus, physician, 390.
Eubulides, Megarian philosopher^
320 note, $2$ note.
Euclid, 210, 21r.
Eudemus of Rhodes, 36, 38.
Eudoxus, 32, 164.
408 INDEX
Eventum (see Accident), 241, 242,
270.
Evil, problem of, 42-53; argu-
ments of Carneades, 334, 335
350-
External things admit the concep-
tion of relative value, 89-93.
Extremity, meaning to Epicurus,
221, 245.
Films, or husks, of external ob-
jects. See Emanations.
Foedera naturae, 201.
"Follow Nature," how interpreted
by Cynics, 10; by Stoics, 77,
78.
Freedom, man's moral, according
to Stoics, 76, 77, 346; to Epicu-
rus, 260-264; position of Car-
neades, 344-347-
Froude, 308.
Galen, physician, 104 note, 371.
Galton, 201.
Gellius cited, 44.
Giussani, 220 note, 293, 295-297.
God, to Stoics the universe, 38-43
(see Pantheism); criticism of
Carneades, 326-340,
Gods, existence of, affirmed by
Epicurus, 168, 174, 282-306,
332, 339-
Gomperz, 235.
Greek science, defects of, 203.
Greek Terms, Aphasia, 315; Apo-
proegmena, 90; Askgsis, 124;
Ataraxia, 315 note; Deikela, 231;
Doxa Prosphatos, 104; Epi-
ballon, 93 note\ Eudsemonia,
84; Hegemonikon, 61, 103;
Horme", 66, 103; KathSkon, 93,
94, 95. 96, 122, 123, 361; Lek-
ton, 58, 59, 63; Logos, 10, n;
meaning to Heraclitus, 12; to
Cleanthes, 16; defined, 25, 70;
Nous, 19, 283; Pneuma, 60, 329;
Pone"ros, 130 note; Pro&gmena,
90 note; Systaseis, 332,
Guyau, 260.
Hecato of Rhodes, Eclectic Stoic,
366,
Helvidius Priscus, 113.
Heraclides, Stoic writer on Ho-
meric Allegories, 14.
Heraclides, teacher of^Enesidemus,
373 not^ 375-
Heraclitus, precursor of Stoics,
10; studied by Zeno and Clean-
thes, 12; his Fragments cited,
10-12; his Logos on its ma-
terial side Fire, n; his implicit
pantheism, 17, 20; his doctrine
of flux, 36; other notices, 200,
219,310,311,331,395,396.
Herbart, 352.
Herculaneum, 157, 296.
Herillus of Carthage, heterodox
pupil of Zeno, 6.
Hermarchus of Mitylene, 155, 157-
159-
Herodotus, Letter to. See Epi-
curus.
Herophilus, physician, 390.
Hesiod, 40, 155, 338.
Hieronymus of Rhodes, Eclectic
Peripatetic, 349.
Hippocrates, 371.
Hirzel, R, 297.
Hobbes, 175, 177, 200.
Homer, 40, 320 note> 338.
Horace, 307.
Hume, 42, 177* i?8, 182, 330, 351,
388, 389, 399; cited, 84, 39-
Hylozoists, 18, 19 note, 61.
Hypotyposeis (Outlines), 372, 376.
Ideas, the Platonic, 30; the high-
est reality, 19; affirmed by the
Stoics to be notions in our minds,
22; rejected by Epicurus, 218,
272.
Idomeneus, Epicurean, 155, 159.
Impulse, 66; instinctive and non-
moral, 78-81; rational, 79, 83,
103; in excess (definition of
emotion), 106.
Intermingling, universal, 28-30.
Intermundia, 201, 216, 287, 290,
294, 295> 297, 298.
Jenkin, Fleeming, 261.
Jus Gentium, 363,
^tant, 346, 282, 327, 388, 389,
397*
INDEX 409
Lachelier, 292 note, 293, 297.
Lampsacus, an Epicurean centre,
i55 i5<5> 159-
Lecky, 145.
Leucippus, 26, 174, 205-207, 244,
259-
Locke, 67, 289.
Logic, Stoic, what it included, 55;
its innovations no improvement
on Aristotle, 56, 57.
Lotze cited, 378 note.
Lucan cited, 39.
Lucian, 100, 307; cited, 308.
Lucretius, 161, 162, 2195 220, 221,
222, 234, 245, 258, 260, 279,
295, 298, 308; his poem On the
Nature of Things, 207, 208;
cited, 214, 220, 221, 222-224,
226, 227, 234, 250-253, 258, 261-
264, 266-270, 273, 274, 280, 281,
289, 290, 293, 299, 300-306.
Lyttos (in Crete), Epicureans ban-
ished from, 307.
Mansel, 330.
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Ro-
man emperor, 14, 39, 309, 360;
his treatise To Himself, 113;
cited, 46-53, *37 I4Q, 141,
146-148.
Marius, 366,
Mathematics, why Epicurus re-
jected, 209-212.
Matter, primary, of Stoics, 24-28,
60; fundamental properties, 204,
219; infinite divisibility denied
by Epicurus, 243. See Atom.
Mayor, J. B., 297.
Menander, fcoet, 154.
Menodotus, Pyrrhonean Sceptic,
373, 374- .
Menceceus, Letter to. SeeEpicurus.
Messene, Epicureans outlawed at,
37*
Metrodorus of Lampsacus, pupil
of Epicurus, 156-159, 308.
Metrodorus of Stratonice, Aca-
demic, 356.
Micon, 5.
Mill, J. S., 42, 393, 394-
Minimum, perceptible by sense,
247; of the atom, 248-251;
divisibile, of Berkeley, 246.
Moore, G. E., 384 note.
Motion, sole form of energy, 206;
of films or atom-complexes,
232-234; of the atom, 222,
224-227, 255-264.
Musonius Rufus, teacher of Epic-
tetus, 113, 127-129, 138, 142,
360; cited, zoo.
Nature, 24; ambiguous, 82; sub-
stituted by Carneades for God,
338.
Nausiphanes of Teos, teacher of
Epicurus, 155.
Necessity, natural or mechanical,
19, 26, 41, 104, 174, 201, 259-
261; distinguished by Chrysippus
from destiny, 345; position of
Carneades, 344-347,
Neo-Platonists, 308.
Neo-Pythagoreans, 308, 355.
New Testament cited, 87, 128,
130, 144.
Nietzsche, Friedrich, cited, 37.
Nirvana, 166, 167.
Numenius, cited, 162.
CEnoanda, in Pisidia, inscriptions
discovered at, 309.
Omcium, 93.
Old Testament cited, 21, 22, 36,
Psetus Thrasea, 113, 369.
Pallas, 285.
Panaetius of Rhodes, Eclectic
Stoic, 112, 130, 358, 362-367.
Pantheism, Stoic, 18-53; of Cle-
anthes, 17, 18, 20; supposed
Semitic origin, 21, 22; criticism
of Carneades, 330-340.
Parmenides of Elea, 20, 206.
Peripatetics, followers of Aristotle,
8, 38, 40, 304, 349 354, 3^6, 369-
Persseus of Citium, Zeno's favour-
ite disciple, 5, 6.
Persius, the poet, 14.
Petronius, 301.
Philo of Alexandria (Judseus),
376.
Philo of Larissa, heterodox Aca-
demic, 355, 375-
Philodemus of Gadara, 291, 296.
410 INDEX
Philosophy, defined by Stoics, 54;
by Epicurus, 163; its task ac-
cording to Carneades, 351, 352;
divisions of (logic, physics, eth-
ics), 55.
Photius cited, 386 note, 390, 391.
Plato, points of contact with Stoi-
cism, 30, 59, 60; influence on
Stoics, 32, 41; criticised by
Chrysippus, 85; divergence in
psychology, 105; followed by
Posidonius, 367; theory of vision,
23S> 236; other notices, 3, 9, 19,
20, 22, 62, 161, 162, 164, I97>
205, 209, 218, 249, 272, 317, 320,
323, 337 338, 340, 349> 353 3^4,
367, 368, 384.
Platonic Dialogues, Gorgias, 196;
Phado, 197, 267, 345; Prota-
goras, 164; Republic, 9, 209;
Sophist, 60; TimcBus, 20, 235,
236* 367-
Pleasure, depreciated by Stoics,
110-112; the ethical end to
Epicurus, 164-173, 185-187.
Plotinus, 162, 323.
Plutarch of Chaeronea cited, 27, 45,
46, 109, 140, 260; histestimonyto
Epicurus, 159; his writings, 360.
Polemo of the Old Academy,
teacher of Zeno, 5, 357,
Polyoenus, disciple of Epicurus,
156, 209.
Polygnotus, 5,
Pompey, 366.
Pope cited, 13.
Posidonius of Apamea, Eclectic
Stoic, 210, 358, 361, 366, 367.
Preconceptions, according to Stoics,
66-68, 82, 126; to Epicurus,
217, 218, 237, 287-289.
Presentation, according to Stoics,
&3> 65, 69-73, 318-320, 341-344,
346,352; according to Epicurus,
237-
Probability, 321, 341, 343-345. 347-
352; divergent interpretations,
,,35?-Prodicus, 174.
Progress, moral, recognized by
founders of Stoic school, 8a, 88,
89; dominated teaching of Sene-
ca and Epictetus, 118-125*
Property, essential quality, 221, 241,
242, 270-272.
Protagoras of Abdera, 155, 210,
396; cited, 283.
Providence, Stoic, 26, 39, 78; denied
by Epicureans, 304; arguments
of Carneades, 330, 334, 335.
Psychology, Stoic, 58-66, 75, 78-83,
102-110; Epicurean, 264-270.
Pyrrho of Elis, 313-317, 320-322,
34i, 373, 374.
Pyrrhoneans. See later Sceptics.
Pyrrhonists,34i, 374.
Pythagoreans, 20, 36, 37.
Pythocles, 156, 194; Letter of
Epicurus to, 279, cited, 228.
Religion (the popular), attitude of
Stoics to, 40, 41,1339; attitude
of Epictetus, 133-137; of Epicu-
rus, 168, 172, 173, 276, 277, 279,
282, 29-8, 299, 301, 302, 304; of
Lucretius, 280, 281, 299, 300-
306; of Xenophanes, 306, 338;
of Democritus, 284-286; of
Carneades, 339, 340.
.Rousseau, 175.
Rush, 199.
Rutilius, 366.
Saturninus, pupil of Sextus, 373,
374:
Sceptic, various meanings, 312.
Sceptics, classified, 313; later
(Pyrrhoncan), 210, 317, 321, 370,
37i s&-
Sceptics of the Academy, 325. See
Academy, New.
Schdmann, O. F., 297,
Scipio, the younger, 362.
Scott, his Dugald Dalgetty, tor.
Scott, Prof. W., 292 noU't his views
on the Epicurean gods cited,
293^295, 297.
Seneca, Lucius Annseus, 14, 137,
140, 159, 360, 368; his views on
probation, 120, 121; love, 109,
127; religious observances, 136;
heroicwomen, 138, 139; his writ-
ings, 113; cited, 27, 31, 39 note,
59, 76, 116, 1x8, 149 notej 150.
Sextus Empiricus, physician and
Sceptic, aio, 37i~375 37&; his
INDEX 411
writings, 372, 373; cited, 71, 286,
3*9* 327> 35<5, 376 note, 379,
380, 386, 390, 391, 393, 396,
398.
Shelley cited, 34.
Signs, argument of ^Enesidemus,
389-391; commemorative and
demonstrative, 392-394.
Slavery, 143-145-
Socrates, typical sage, 88, 115, 119;
Socratic tradition preserved by
Stoics, 4, 64; through Cynics, 9;
teleology, 39, 41, 75; ethics, 83,
104; other notices, 164, 210, 321,
322,329, 351.
Sophists, 4, 325.
Sorites, 325.
Soul, its nature according to Stoics,
60; its unity, 61, 62, 65, 105;
diverse functions, 63, 64; limited
immortality allowed by some
Stoics, 364; Epicurean doctrine
of, 264-270.
Space, to Stoics incorporeal, 59; to
Epicurus real, 220; conceived as
vacuum, 206, 220.
Spencer, Herbert, 156, 198, 199-
202.
Speusippus, Plato's successor, 357.
Sphaerus of Bosporus, 6.
Stilpo, Megarian philosopher, 5.
StoaPcecile, 5.
Strato of Lampsacus, Peripatetic,
23, 61, 62.
Suicide, 98-102.
Swinburne, 156.
Teleology, Stoic, 25, 26, 38-43,
327; rejected by Epicurus, 40,
43, 163, 208, 274-281,^327; by
Lucretius, 304-306 ; arguments
of Carneades, 323, 327-329, 337,
338.
Tennyson cited, 287, 302.
Tension of primary substance
variable, 24, 31; in substance of
soul, 104, 105.
Thales of Miletus cited, 20.
Theophrastus, Aristotle's succes-
sor, 23, 235, 320 note, 357.
Time, to Stoics, incorporeal, 59;
howconceived by Epicurus, 272-
274; view of ^Enesidemus, 396,
Timon of Phlius, 3*3-31$, 373
note, 374; cited, 320.
Tropes, the ten of ^Enesidemus,
376-380; the five of Agrippa,
379; the eight of ^Enesidemus
upon causality, 386, 387.
Tubero, Lucius Alius, 375, 376.
Virgil, 33, 307.
Virtue, how conceived by Stoics,
85-88; by Epicurus, 172, 174;
his criticism of Stoic virtue, 196,
197.
Visum, 63, 72.
Volition, confused- with judgment
by the Stoics, 64; bothjudgmentand volition confused with feel-
ing, 102, 103, 105, 106.
Voltaire, 308.
War, 142,
World (cosmical system) defined
by Epicurus, 228.
World-cycles, recurrent, 36-38,
364, 367-
Xenocrates, Academic, 357.
Xenophanes, implicit pantheism
of, 17, 20; criticised the popular
faith, 306, 338.
Xenophon, 337.
Zeno of Citium, founder of the
Stoic school, 4-7, 10, 22, 42, 88,
140, 151, 340, 357, 364, 368;
his treatise, The Republic, 9;
his function to combine rather
than to originate, 12; supposed
Semitic elements in his teaching,
21 ; his two principles, force and
matter, 13, 28; views on re-
ligion, 40; on the relation of sen-
sation to knowledge, 72; on
moral progress, 89; definition of
the ethical end, 79; introduced
into ethics the conception of
Value, 90; and the term Kathe"-
kon, 93-95; controversy with
Arcesilas, 319; argument cited,
328.
Zeno of Elea,' 243, 246.
Zeno of Sidon, later Epicurean,
210,
412 . INDEX
Zeno of Tarsus, fourth head of sonal God, 14-16; and yet
Stoic school, 360. identical with the All, 40, 135;
Zeus, identified with Fire and city of, 76, 142; the sky or
,
Logos by Heraclitus, 12; ad- ether according to Democritus,
dressed by Cleanthes as a per- 285.
CZ
114120
