arV13913
Seneca and Kant
Cornell University Library
3 1924 031 229 622
olin.anx
The original of tliis book is in
tine Cornell University Library.
There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.
http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924031229622
SENECS SND KSNT
SENECI ANDKMT
OR
AN EXPOSITION OF
Stoic and Rationalistic Ethics
WITH
A Comparison aijd Criticism of tlje Two SystecQS
A
EEV.w! tTjackso:n", Ph. d.
Late Professor of Modern Languages in Indiana University '
^'Prove all things ; hold fast that which is good."
DAYTON, OHIO
UNITED BRETHREN PUBLISHING HOUSE
1881
Copyright, 1881,
BY W. T. JACKSON.
TO
PROFESSORS COCKER, FRIEZE AND MORRIS
or laCBIGAN UNTVBBSITY,
HONORED ALIKE FOR SOUND SCHOLARSHIP AND MORAL WORTH,
This Humble Fruit of Philosophical Study,
PURSUED UNDER THEIR DIRECTION,
IS INSCRIBED
WITH THE RESPECT AND GRATITUDE OF
S'ht Jluihci^,
PREFACE.
Philosophical studies, always important, have in late years
acquired special significance, when the theories of the past
and the institutions which embody them ; when law, relig-
ion, and government, as well as history, literature, and art,
are undergoing a searching criticism ; when of necessity
there is a constant recurrence to first principles, and all
things are brought, as far as possible, to the test of right
reason.
The following is a humble contribution to philosophical
literature in the department of ethics. It was originally
prepared as a thesis for the Doctor's degree in Michigan
University, and, at the suggestion of friends, has been en-
larged and made ready for the press. I have sought in the
expository portions to state fairly, as well as clearly and
briefly, the doctrines of the authors discussed ; to put into
order and connection what I have found scattered here and
there ; to avoid technicalities, or explain them ; and to pre-
serve, as far as may be, in an English dress the expressions
used by the authors themselves.
It is precisely one hundred years since Kant's Critique of
thePureReason was first published, his Critique ofthe Prac-
HealReason following seven years later, while Stoicism arose
asa distinct system more than twothousand years ago. Both
VI PREFACE.
systems have been widely influential, and they have had
time to exhibit their fruits.
It is believed that the subjects treated will be of interest
not only to those whose vocation, in the pulpit, at the bar,
or in the halls of instruction, constantly requires them ta
consider the grave problem of right, but also to that other
class of thinkers who, apart from their occupation, are
interested in all that has been thought by the world's great
intellects of the past.
The heathen philosopher, ignorant of Christianity, and the
rationalist, who ignores it, may yet teach us some ofthe sub-
limest moral doctrines that are in perfect accord with Chris-
tianity ; while their very failures serve only, by contrast, tO'
disclose new beauty in its imperishable truths.
If this book shall serve in any degree to make available
the thoughts of two eminent leaders of thought, one in the
ancient and one in the modern world ; if, still more, it shall
conduce to right thinking on the all-important subject of
which it treats, and to right acting as well, its end wiU be
attained.
My obligations are gratefully acknowledged to Dr. W. T.
Harris, late of St. Louis, for the loan of a rare work, and to
many esteemed friends for valuable suggestions.
Academy, Fostoria, Ohio,
September, iBSt.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
PAca.
Introductory—The Rise and Causes of Stoicism—Intel-
lectual Origin—Historical Origin—Socrates—Zeno
—
Seneca il
CHAPTER II.
The Ethical Doctrines of Stoicism 25
CHAPTER III.
The Ethical Systeip of Kant 49
CHAPTER IV.
A Comparison and Criticism of the Two Systems 77
CHAPTER I
SENECA AND KANT.
CHAPTER I.
Introductory—The Rise and Causes of Stoicism—Intellectual
Origin—Historical Origin—Socrates—Zeno—Seneca.
The causes of Stoicism were both intellect-
ual and political. It is not difficult to trace
its parentage directly to Cynicism, and in-
directly to Socrates and Heraclitus ; while
many points of relationship with Aristotle
are also visible. Thus the doctrine of an
ethereal fire, which in regular cycles absorbs
and consumes all things, is clearly Heracli-
tean ; the doctrine of a world-soul, and the
assumed union of matter and spirit (or form)
are taken from Plato and Aristotle. But as
we are concerned more directly with the ethics
of the Stoics, we may add that their greatest
obligations in this department are to the Cyn-
ical school of Antisthenes and Diogenes.
That many-sided philosopher and moral
12 Seneca and Kant.
hero, Socrates, had perished at Athens, 399
B. c. Justly does Dr. Smith call him, in view
of the powerful impulse which he gave to
philosophy, and especially as being the in-
tellectual parent of the great lights that fol-
lowed him, "the greatest and most original of
the Grecian philosophers." * It was natural
that he should have many followers, and equal-
ly natural that each of them should compre-
hend bat a part of their master's character
and doctrine. A Plato might drink deeply
into his whole spirit and teaching, but Euclid
could see little more in them thaa dialectics ;
Aristippus could understand only the eudse-
monistic side ; while to cynical Antisthenes,
his master's excellence consisted chiefly in
his rude and slovenly dress, his disregard
of all conventionalities, his forbearance un-
der domestic and other tribulations, his
marvelous self-control and unflinching ad-
herence to his convictions".
These men, no doubt, assimilated such
parts of the admired Socrates as were con
genial to their own natures ; and we may
'Student's Hist, of Greece, p. 418.
Seneca and Kant. 15
well imagine, therefore, the sternness of
Antisthenes, when he imbibed all that was
harsh and forbidding in the character of his
master. With him virtue alone must be
sought, enjoyment banished, and self-control
be the constant watch-word. There must be
no taste in dress or language,—the balder
and rougher the better,—with a contempt for
the religion and government of the times.
Such, in brief, was Cynicism; and we can
readily discern in it the very form and many
of the lineaments of Stoicism.
But this was not all. Philosophy usually
reflects its times. A practical age calls forth
a practical philosophy ; an eminently rever-
ential age evokes a theological, often a
mystical philosophy; while a skeptical, irrev-
erent age as surely begets a skeptical or
rationalistic philosophy. When the intellect
is " quickened, and the desire for knowledge
and refinen;ient is awakened, freedom of
government, and especially national, discus-
sions 'and uprisings in the interest of free-
dom, conspire to enkindle a freedom and
vigor of thought that seem to border al-
14 Seneca and Kant.
most on the miraculous. Such were the
Elizabethan age of English, and the Per-
iclean age of Greek literature.
Philosophy shares this impulse. In the
palmy days of Greek freedom, when united
she feared no foe, when she was mistress
of both power and culture, thought sympa-
thized with the general elevation, and soar-
ed to moral and intellectual heights before
unattained. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle,
each in a different way, showed what the
human mind can do when, kindled to a
noble activity, it has proper encouragement
from society and protection from government.
But when tyranny is crushing the life out
of its subjects ; when a base servility shapes
every thought, sentiment, and custom of the
age, the spirit of man droops; and as all
inspiration languishes, philosophy languishes
also, or perishes altogether. Such was the
condition of Rome under such monsters as
Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, in the days
of the later Stoicism.
It is scarcely better when society is in a
state of constant revolution and chaos ; when
Seneca and Kant. 15
government, religion—all institutions, are giv-
ing way, and men know not which way to
look for hope. Such was the unhappy con-
dition of Greece when Stoicism first sprung
up and flourished on her soil. Yet as the
sweetest poetry has often sprung from the
sorrow of the soul, so some of the richest
gems of truth have been called forth by the
afflictions of life.
In the year 338 b. c, or eighteen years be-
fore Zeno came to Athens, Philip had giv-
en the death-blow to Grecian independence
on the disastrous field of Chaeronea. The
-spirit of jealousy and dissension between
states was rife, and Philip knew how to feed
It and turn it to his own account. Thus
jealousy and intestine strife were constantly
weakening and devouring, until they gave
way to a common lamentation over a com-
mon ruin. Alexander might appeal to their
patriotism ; might lead them forth to conquer
a world ; might carry his victorious arms from
the Ister to the Indus, and from the Lybian
to the Bactrian desert; might spread the
Greek language and literature everywhere;
1
6
Seneca and Kant.
but little it mattered to -the Greeks, while
with the language was published the fact
that they were a conquered nation.
Nor were they destined to be completely
absorbed in the new empire, and by forget-
ting the past to transfer their affections to
the new dynasty. Rome soon appears on
the scene, and the role of Philip is played
again. The overthrow is complete, when.
Greece sinks to the condition of a Roman
province.
While these great changes were takings
place outwardly, what was the condition of
the internal life of the nation? We may be
sure that great changes were occurring there
also. During and after the Persian wars, Per-
sian gold was silently but surely corrupting the
fountains of their strength and purity. With,
the decline of national prosperity anjj the
spread of corruption, the religious faith was
giving way; and what was now to take its
place? From the temples of gods and god-
desses, men turned to the schools and groves
of the philosophers.
Socrates had taught some of the noblest.
Seneca and Kant. 17
moral precepts, and immortalized them by
his death. Plato had passed a tranquil life,
dedicated more to intellectual than to moral
aims. Aristotle had reared a solid and mag-
nificent intellectual structure, but had been
compelled, on a false charge, to flee from
the city for his life. And now, as interest in
the nation declines, interest in the individu-
al increases. No longer is the old theory
prevalent, that the individual lives for the
state, but rather he lives within himself. Mil-
itary and political life, once so glorious, have
now dropped into mercenary insignificance,
and have no longer any charms for a noble
mind. The inner life, the life of the soul, is
the only safe intrenchment against the ca-
lamities that beset the world without.
As Poetter well says : " While thus sat-
isfaction in the objective world vanishes, the
mind withdraws itself into its own subject-
ivity. It concerns itself no longer about the
knowledge of the world, but rather about
freedom fi-om the world."* Zeller remarks
that "the bloom of Greek philosophy was
*Geschichte der Philosophie, Theil 1., p. xoo.
1
8
Seneca and Kant.
short-lived."* Yet let us look among the
vines for the later vintage ; perhaps we shall
find a few clusters that have withstood the
frosts and storms, nay, that have even been
ripened by their influence.
We have seen that it was not altogether
a new thing in Greek philosophy that at-
tention should be directed chiefly to man.
Socrates had done this. He had emphasized
the nobility and superiority of a life of virtue
over a life of mere sense. The Sophists,
though with far less noble aims, had done
the same. They had taught a shrewd,
money-making, not a noble, elevating phil-
osophy, in which "man was the center and
measure of all things." The Cynics, as we
have seen, though with an entirely opposite
purpose, did substantially the same.
Now there arise three schools, side by side,
whose leaders are priests serving a common
deity of self, only at different altars. Epi-
curus sounds the note of pleasure and self-
satisfaction, preferring indeed that it be vir-
tuous, but not disallowing it when vicious.
*Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics, p. lo.
Seneca and Kant. 19
Pyrrho, of the skeptical school, will rather
have men refrain from all dogmatizing of
any sort, and finds peace of mind, he thinks,
in the cautious attitude of thorough non-
committalism. His attitude in the world is
that of a visitor. "Hands off!" is his watch-
word. "Nothing ventured, nothing lost."
Not so Zeno and Chrysippus. To the heavy
brunt of calamity and woe, they bring the
active resistance of a mind, fortified by the
determination to cling to virtue, at what-
ever cost. Thus the course of philosophy
had long been directed to man, and the
course of events now tended to keep it
there.
The founder of Stoicism* was Zeno of Cit-
tium in Cyprus, who by the accident of a
shipwreck was brought to Athens about 320
B. c. Having studied the Cynic, Megaric,
and Academic philosophies, he founded, 310
B. c, a school of his own, called Stoic, from
the 2z(M. Ttotxil-^, where it assembled. Him-
self and his school were held in high re-
spect by the Athenians, who honored him
*'Zeller, also Ueberweg, Hist, of Phil., Vol, 1., sub voce.
20 Seneca and Kant.
after his death with a tomb and brazen mon-
ument, at the public expense. His writings^
though numerous, have all been lost. He
was succeeded by Cleanthes, of Assos, whose
celebrated hymn to the Deity is still extant.
But by far the most noteworthy personage
in the early Stoic philosophy was Chrysip-
pus,* of Soli in Cilicia. He so developed
and elaborated the system that he has de-
servedly been called the second founder of
Stoicism. He was a most voluminous writ-
er, his works numbering seven hundred and
five. Other representatives of Greek Sto-
icism were Persseus, Aristo of Chios, Heril-
lus of Carthage, Diogenes of Seleucia, and
Antipater of Tarsus. These names are
found in the flourishing period of Greek
Stoicism, or in the century and a half suc-
ceeding its establishment.
About the middle of the second century
B. c, Pansetius of Rhodes introduced Stoi-
cism into Rome, where it gained many dis-
tinguished and learned disciples ; amongthem^
though with some modifications, Cicero, Lae-
*ZeUer, p, 40; also, Ueberweg, Vol. I., p. iSjff.
Seneca and Kant. 21
lius, Scipio, Seneca, and the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius. Other Stoics of this period- were
Posidonius of Apamea, Athenodorus of Tar-
sus, Diodotus, the teacher of Cicero, Cornu-
tus, Musonius, and especially Epictetus. In
these writers, though we often find all the
harshness and rigor of the early Stoic doc-
trine, yet on the whole, in theory and practice
a decided leaning toward Eclecticism pre-
vails.
L. Annseus Seneca, upon whose presenta-
tion of Stoicism we shall chiefly rely, was
born at Cordova, Spain, about the year 5,
A. D. The family removed to Rome, where
he was favored with wealth and the highest
social and educational advantages. He was
soon an advocate of prominence, then quaes-
tor. But the jealousy of Caligula and Clau-
dius resulted in his exile to Corsica. There
for eight years he gave himself closely to the
study of philosophy.
On the accession of Nero he is recalled,
made praetor, and becomes tutor of the em-
peror, whose ungovernable lust and cruelty,
however, he is totally powerless to restrain.
22 Seneca and Kant.
Now he rides on the full tide of wealth, hon-
or, and royal favor, preserving, however, amid
all this splendor, a Stoic abstemiousness in
his habits. Soon the nobles are jealous and
intrigue against him. He sees with alarm that
the capricious Nero is alienated from him, and
fearing a worse fate, offers to surrender to
him all his vast wealth. This proposal, with
his retirement from the city, hardly appeases
the despot's anger. On the outbreak of the
conspiracy of Piso, he is charged with being
a participant. Nero resolves on his death.
Seneca does not await the issue, but like a
true Stoic, hears the tidings with calmness, as
the voice of fate, and takes his life by a lin-
gering death. His philosophical works had
been composed partly during his exile in Cor-
sica, partly in brief intervals snatched from
political cares, and partly in retirement after
his loss of royal favor.
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER II.
The Ethical Doctrines of Stoicism.*
What, now, is philosophy with the Stoics ?
It is wholly a practical matter, the knowledge
and practice of the means to be used to se-
cure inward tranquillity and happiness. It is,
hence, essentially ethical, and the study of
logic and physics is entirely subordinated to
this end. Tx) use one of their comparisons,
logic is the shell, physics the white, and eth-
ics the yolk ; or, again, logic is the skeleton,
physics the flesh, and ethics the soul.f
Their theory of physics has a close and
important bearing on their ethical doctrine.
They assume in nature two ultimate principles,
—matter and force. Matter is passive, and
capable of receiving all motion ; the working,
noving force is God, and these are insepara-
•The foUowiitg account of Stoicism has been drawn chiefly from Seneca's
De Providentt^, De Tranquillitate Animi, De Brivitatt Yita, De Vita
Beata and Epijifilte, the author seeking, in this and the following chapter,
merely to act ai* a faithful interpreter, suffering Seneca and Kant,^ much
as poss^le, to speak for themselves, and reserving for a future chapter a
discussion of their doctrines.
t Posidonius in Ueberweg, Vol. I., Art. Stoicism.
26 Seneca and Kant.
bly united. They reason thus : The universe
is limited and spherical, and though possess-
ing great variety of parts, is substantially a
unity. This unity, as a whole, must be more
perfect than any of its parts, some of which
we see to be self-conscious. Hence, the
universe is pervaded by an ethereal fire>
which is its soul and reason ; that is, God.
By an absolute necessity, or inner law of the
divine reason, all things are, in definite pe-
riods, absorbed into the Deity, to be evolved
anew at the appointed time. The soul of
man is an emanation from the Deity, and as-
such may outlive the body, but can not endure
beyond the cycle to which it belongs. In this-
doctrine of physics we can readily recognize,
though with a new application, Plato's idea of
a world-soul, and Aristotle's union of matter
and form, before alluded to ; while the bear-
ing of the doctrine toward fatalism, panthe-
ism, and materialism will be distinctly noticed..
Almost all the ethical doctrines of the Sto-
ics may be comprised in the two propositions
:
I. That virtue consists in conformity to-
nature.
Seneca and Kant. 2^
II. That virtue is sufficientfor happiness.
But it is very important to understand pre-
cisely what the Stoics mean by the terms
"happiness," "virtue," and "conformity to
nature," or we can gain no intelligible idea
of their system.
I. Virtue consists in conformity to nature.
According to Zeno, the ethical end of man
is "to live in harmony with one's self;" ac-
cording to Cleanthes, it is " to live conforma-
bly to nature,"—that is, to the course of the
universe ; while Chrysippus combines both
man and nature. "Live," says he, "accord-
ing ^to your experience of the course of nat-
ure." Among the later Stoics there is the
same difference. Diogenes Babylonius would
have " prudence and reason " used in select-
ing "things according to nature." Antipater
of Tarsus would make it " the unvarying
choice of things conformable, and rejection of
things nonconformable, to nature." So, sub-
stantially, Panaetius and Posidonius. Seneca,
with his usual terseness, says it is sufficient to
say simply, "Living conformably;" that is,
consistently; since it is only reason that will
28 Seneca and Kant.
*
always choose the same things and reject the
same.*
It will be seen that there is some diversity
of views expressed as to what this nature is,
to which conformity is required,—whether it is
the rational nature of man, or the system of
laws established by the Deity. Both views
are held, without much attempt to reconcile
them; but the emphasis is laid chiefly on the
latter, as the sequel will show.
We are thus brought face to face with the
assumption, already hinted at in the physics,
that there is a course of the universe, a
mighty machinery of fate, whose wheels roll
on perpetually, and powerless our help or
hinderance. Our duty is but to submit.
" Fate leads us on," says Seneca, "and what
of time remains for each of us, the first hour
of our birth allotted. * * * ^ long time
ago it was appointed what you should rejoice
over, what you should weep over. Cause de-
pends upon cause, and « * nothing
happens, but it comes."
^
•Ueberwcg's Hist. Phil., Vol. I., pp. 198-300.
tSeneca's Moral Essays, Hurst & Whiting's Ed,, De FrovideDtia, Cap.V
Seneca and Kant. 29
But this course of nature is not a mere
blind and irrational mechanism that works, it
knows not why ; it is the expression of the
Supreme Reason of the universe, the voice of
the Deity himself. It is the all-controlling law
from which even God is not exempt. Says
Seneca, "The Founder and Controller of all
things wrote the fates, indeed, but he obeys
them himself; he commanded once, he obeys
always "* by which I understand that the
course of nature which he established is a
rational one, and he obeys it therefore volun-
tarily. This explains why the terms "fate"
and "providence," "reason" and "nature,"
are used interchangeably.
The first great duty of a wise man, there-
fore, is unconditional submission to the course
of nature. As he is, in part at least, a
rational being, he must voluntarily acknowl-
edge and obey the rational order of the uni-
verse. " What is the duty of a wise man?"
asks Seneca. "To surrender himself to fate.
It is a great comfort to be borne along with
the universe. We are all chained to fortune,
*Ibid.,Cap. VI.
3o Seneca and Kant.
but what does it matter ? The same custody
surrounds all, and they are themselves bound
who have bound us."* Nor will he do this
grudgingly. On the contrary, so ready will
he be to accede to the demands of so elevat-
ed a law, that he would even anticipate its
requirements if he knew them, and obey
them in advance.
If obedience requires suffering, it matters
not. " Whatever must be endured in accord-
ance with the constitution of the universe,"
says Seneca, "will be [cheerfully accepted
and] turned to account {usurpetur) by a great
mind. By this oath we have been bound, to
bear those earthly ills which it is out of our
power to avoid, and not to be disturbed by
them. We have been born in a government:
to obey God is liberty Good men are not
dragged by Fortune; they follow and keep
up with her ; if they had known, they would
have anticipated her."f Demetrius com-
plains of the Deity for not making known his
will. He says he would rather offerthan sur-
render. His children, his health, his life
•De Tranq. An., X., a, 3. fDe Vita Beata, XV., 6.
Seneca and Kant. 31
anight be taken—his consent should not be
withheld; "for," says he, "I know that all
things occur according to a fixed law, decreed
for all time."
The watch-word of the true Stoic is well
-expressed in the following lines from the
ihymn of Cleanthes, translated thus by Cicero
:
"Buc, O parens, celsique dominator poli,
Quocumque placuit : nulla parendi mora est,
Ducunt voleniem fata, nohntem trahuni."
"Which may be retranslated freely as fol-
lows :
Lead me, O Parent, ruler of high heaven,
Where'er thou'rt pleased ; I'll not be tardy to obey.
The fates e'er lead the willing man ; unwilling ones they drag.
t
Thus, as Zeller has said, virtue, with the
Stoic,begins with acknowledging the rational
order of the universe, and ends with unhesi-
tating obedience to it.
II. In this submission to the course ofnature
^
4)r virtue, and it alone, is found true happi->
ness. "To live happily," says Seneca, "is
the same thing as to live according to nat-
32 Seneca and Kant.
ure."* This is not to be confounded with,
mere pleasure : these are with the Stoic very
^different things. Happiness is that calm en-
joyment of the soul which is connected only
with virtue. It is the harmony of the soul,
'
in which it is conscious of no dissension nor
hesitation, but of perfect compliance with ita
own reason, and, therefore, the reason of the
universe. Hence Seneca says, "You may
therefore boldly avow that the highest good
[virtue] is the harmony of the soul,"'|' Pleas-
ure, on the contrary, springs from our pas-
sions, our desires, and our hopes. These
fluctuate ; nor does it always attend even
these. Happiness, however, always attends
virtue ; they are indissolubly united. Pleas-
ure depends on externals, which are beyond
our control ; happiness has an unfailing fount-
ain within the soul. Pleasure leads to evil;
virtue takes us from evil. Pleasure is found
among the basest ; happiness only among the
good. Pleasure, therefore, is to the wise
man something entirely indifferent and ad-
ventitious, while virtue is an end in itself.
•De Vita Beata,VIH., i. tibid., VIII., 5.
Seneca and Kant, 33
But if virtue is sought for happiness, it is
no longer virtue. However pure a thing
happiness may be, it never can usurp the
place of virtue, and become the highest good.
Virtue alone is the summum bonum, the all,
the end of life. Yet men are perpetually
confounding the highest good with pleasure
and happiness, and asking, "What do we
seek to gain by virtue?" as if there could
be anything more than the whole, or any-
thing beyond the end. "You mistake," says
Seneca, "when you ask. What is that for the
sake of which I seek virtue ? for you ask for
something higher than the highest. Do you
ask what 1 seek from Virtue ? Herself! for
she has nothing better; she is her own re-
ward."*
"Just as in a field which has been plowed
for a crop, some flowers spring up; yet not
for these flowers, however much they delight
the eye, was so much labor expended. The
planter had another purpose ; this was inci-
dental. So also happiness is neither the re-
ward nor the cause of virtue, but a mere
*De Vita Beata., IX., i, a.
34 Seneca and Kant.
incident of it."* Happiness is called, there-
fore, only the companion, the accompaniment,
the shadow incomes, accessio, umbra') of vir-
tue. Hence the paradox: Not to need hap-
piness is happiness.
After this general view of their doctrine,
let us examine more closely their theory of
perfect conformity to nature, and of happiness
as resulting from this conformity. In doing
so, two problems at once present themselves,
namely
:
1. To show that everything (even, for ex-
ample, the inequalities of our lot, the oppo-
sition and tyranny of the wicked) does occur
according to a rational course of nature.
2. To explain the possibility of that per-
fect conformity to this course of nature, which
the theory presupposes. Let us see how the
Stoics dispose of these difficulties.
I. We must first inquire what end the
Deity proposes in the government of the
universe. As he is the Supreme Reason, he
can not be under the control of passion, and
hence can not be malevolent. He manifestly
•Ibid.
Seneca and Kant. 35
proposes that man shall be governed by the
same law of reason to which he has volun-
tarily subjected himself, and conformity to
which constitutes virtue. Nothing in the
world, therefore, is important but virtue and
vice ; nothing else need be earnestly sought
or shunned. All the objects that men or-
dinarily seek or fear are entirely indifferent
(ddcdifopa). External goods are but bag-
gage ; they are delusive and vain. -True
blessings, on the contrary, are internal and
enduring. The only things we need to fear t
are "crimes, base thoughts, evil intentions,
lust, avarice;"* the only good we need to
seek is virtue. The sage may be imprison-
ed, slandered, deprived of every external
blessing and even life, but while he posses-
ses this treasure he is tranquil and happy.
But does everything, even calamity and
reproach, take place according to a rational
plan? " Yes," answers the Stoic. The course
of the world has been arranged, not to secure
pleasure, but virtue, and therefore enduring
happiness. It is unreasonable, argues Sen
•Ue Prov., Vl., I.
36 Seneca and Kant.
eca, that the Good should injure the good.
They have the common bond of virtue to
unite them ; and good men are imitators and
emulators of the Supreme Good. But virtue
requires discipline ; and hence good men are
inured to toil and hardships, while the wick-
ed are allowed to be voluptuous and sensual.
Like athletes, the good must be subjected
to severe discipline
,-
they must wrestle and
struggle with capricious Fortune, and endure
all her buffetings manfully. How could the
excellence of virtue be seen without trial ?
Where would be patience, if there were no
bereavements and losses ? So lofty is Virtue,
we need not expect to reach her by a level
path : we must look for precipitous heights
and toilsome climbing. Hence another par-
adox : " The ills of life are not ills, except
to those who bear them ill."*
But while the Deity's discipline is stern,
it is also loving. He well knows that un-
troubled pleasure, like the fattening of ani-
mals for the stall, produces helplessness. He
admires the bold struggling and moral forti-
*lbid., passim.
Seneca and Kant. 37
tude of a brave man ; and as the most gifted
pupils receive the hardest tasks, and the
bravest soldiers are chosen for the most per-
ilous assaults, so it is a mark of his favor to
be chosen as an adversary of Fortune. Pros-
perity is given only to the mass, and to those
of low talents. So again we have the para-
dox : " Never to have been miserable is to
be miserable."
How, now, will one of noble mind receive
this discipline of Providence ? He will re-
gard all adversities as disciplines, and, amid
all the assaults of Fortune, he will stand as
unchangeable as the saltness of the sea.
While not without sensibility, he will remain
placid, never yielding to circumstances, but
making everything conduce to the attainment
•of virtue. Thus, by putting a favorable con-
struction on everything, the ills of life will
lose their bitterness ; he will become indiffer-
ent to Fortune, and even dare her to do her
worst. Like the gladiator who sighed that
the flower of his youth was passing, and that
exhibitions were so rare, he will long for an
occasion to call forth his heroism, lest his
38 Seneca and Kant.
virtue fade by disuse. Far from self-seeking-
and love of pleasure, his will be the spirit
of a Mucius Scsevola, calmly holding his-
hand in the flames, from patriotism, or of a
Regulus, suffering torture but not disgrace.
Never will he suffer from luxury; leave that,
for a Maecenas or a Nero. His sufferings,
if such they can be called, will be of another
sort.*
He now knows, too, and can trust himself.
Not like one who has obtained the empty
glory of a crown at Olympia without a com-
petitor, he has won his by the sweat and
dust of a hotly-contested race. He stands
also as a living example, to show that the
opinions of the multitude concerning bless-
ings and trials are false. "He spends and
is spent willingly." -j" He regards his life
and whatever he possesses as not his own,
but as lent to him. Whenever he shall be
bidden to return it, he will not complain to
Fortune, but will say, "I give you thanks,
for that which I have possessed and enjoyed.
I have tilled your property at great cost, it
•De Prov., II., i ff. flbid., V., 3.
Seneca and Kant. 39
is true, but because you command, I give
it up. I surrender it cheerfully and willingly;
* * * take back a soul better than you
gave it; I do not evade you nor flee from
you. *
2. We are now ready to inquire as to
the possibility of such a perfect conformity
to the course of nature as the theory requires.
Admitting that no real evil can befall the
Stoic's good man ; that he possesses the
divine alchemy of transmuting every loss
and cross into a blessing, can all obtain
this magic power? Can the sage at all
times retain it? This is the crucial test of
Stoicism.
They confess that, like the original dual-
ism of matter and reason in the universe,
there is a dualism of passion and reason in
man, with this difference, that passion, alas
!
is ever active. But they maintain that emo-
tion always springs from false imagination,
and never exists with a rational view of
things. Thus from a false and irrational
conception of present and future good spring
*De Tranq. An., XI., i, 2, 3.
40 Seneca and Kant.
pleasure and desire, and from imaginary
present and fature ill, care and fear.* In
reality there is no ground for them. They
are diseases of the soul, and a sure evidence
of lack of self-control. The sage, there-
fore, must be absolutely free from passion.
If any exception be made, he may smile at
the follies of men ; but even this is, as a
rule, to be avoided. To do otherwise would
be to make indifferent things objects of im-
portance. Why should he grieve over phys-
ical pain, reproach, or loss of property, friends,
or reputation ? They are not evils for him-
self, and if not, why grieve when they fall
to the lot of others ? Says Seneca : "All
things, therefore, are to be made light of
and borne with tranquil mind. To be tort-
ured with others' misfortunes is a perpetual
misery; to rejoice over them is an inhuman
pleasure."! He even goes so far as to say
that it is a useless sympathy to weep and
knit one's brow, even though some one is
burying his daughter.^
We can now understand why some of the
*Cf. Zeller, p. 237. fDe Tr»nq. An., XV., 2-4. {Ibid., XV., 4.
Seneca and Kant. 41
Stoics say that virtue is conformity with the
nature of the universe, and others, that it is
<:onformity with the nature of man. These
•definitions may be interpreted as identical.
The course of the universe is founded on
reason, and the true nature of man is reason.
" What can be better for us, who have re-
>ceived a rational nature," says Seneca, "than
reason."* "Zeno," says Cicero, "placed all
ihe virtues in reason."f And Cicero himself
5ays, "Virtue can be briefly defined as right
>reason."J In reason, therefore, alone does
man find his harmony and oneness with the
universe. By its magic power all discord,
internal and external, ceases. Calm, indif-
ferent to all else, he embarks on the stream
of fate, his mind fixed on this single object,
.that no side-currents nor adverse winds shall
Jiinder him or drift him ashore.
To maintain this supremacy of reason,
«ow, certain precepts are repeatedly insisted
upon:
(i.) The passions must be thoroughly sub-
*De Vita Beata., XIV., i. fCic. Acad., I., lo.
JTusc. Disp., IV., IS, 34-
42 Seneca and Kant.
dued and even extirpated. "The greatest
and noblest thing and most like the Deity,"*
we are told, "is, Not to be disturbed." The
mind must remain in a placid state—never
elated, never depressed. Only thus can the
sage maintain his supremacy of reason.
(2.) He must withdraw from public affairs,,
and all exciting scenes, whenever his tran-
quillity and independence, are threatened.
What cares he for politics or state ? The
world is his country. Honor is but vanity,
wealth is but a burden, patriotism an irration-
al passion. His virtue is his only treasure^
and nothing is to allure him from it.
(3.) He must also accustom himself to the
greatest simplicity in apparel, food, furniture,.
—in all his surroundings. Luxury ministers
only to passion; it must be proscribed as a.
deadly foe. "We must be accustomed," says
Seneca, " to remove from ourselves all dis-
play, * * * to restrain all luxury, to-
govern our appetites, and to measure things
by their use, not by their ornament,"f Wealth,
must not be sought. An amount but littlt
•De Tranq. An., II., 3, 4. fltid., IX., i, a.
Seneca and Kant. 43
removed from poverty, and far removed from
riches, so that his independence shall not be
sacrificed on the one hand, nor his vanity
tempted on the other, is to be the limit of his
wishes.
(4.) Above all, he must withdraw within
himself, and find in contemplation a satisfac-
tion which he despairs of finding, and is
forbidden to seek, in the world. "In se revo-
candum. estr "in se recedendum est"* is the
favorite text on which the Stoic teachers love
to dwell, and to which they constantly revert.
In short, the sage is to be jealous of Fortune j
he is to trust himself as little as possible to
her caprices ; he is to be ready at all times
for the worst, and never to be disconcerted by
it. With but few sails spread, the rest cau-
tiously furled, prepared for all weathers and
accidents, he is to stand persistently at the
helm, from which no amusements are to en-
tice,nor storms drive him away.
But what if adversities are too severe for
mortal flesh and blood ? Can that ever hap-
pen? "Yes, it may," say the Stoics. When-
'(^We must withdraw [the mind]; must retire within ourselves.
44 Seneca and Kant.
ever the sage by living must forfeit his
independence by reason of tyranny, poverty,
or other unavoidable evils, he may and ought
to take his own life. "The door stands
open," says Seneca ; " life is easily taken,"*
and life and death are things indifferent.
"
The
sage never fears death. When impassable
barriers surround him, he will know that it is
the voice of the Deity summoning him, and
he will obey. This precept was faithfully
executed by Zeno, Cleanthes, Cato Minor,
Seneca, and others.
To recapitulate : The Stoics teach the
original dualism of matter and force ; that this
force is the Supreme Reason, the soul of the
universe; that the Supreme Reason has es-
tablished a rational course of the universe,
by which all things take place according to a
fixed law or fate ; that he himself is subject
to this law ; that it is the duty of the wise
man to conform to this law, since he is a
rational being; that this conformity consti-
tutes virtue, and virtue secures happiness ;,
that to this end hardships, trials, and losses
•De Prov., VI., 6, and Cic. Tusc. Disp., I., 74.
Seneca and Kant. 45
are allotted by the Deity to the virtuous man
as a discipline ; that virtue is the only good
and a sufficient good ; that all other so-called
goods are illusive and spring from passion,
and not reason ; that passion is therefore to
be repressed, and reason invariably obeyed
;
that all which ministers to passion is to be
curtailed or avoided, and contemplation and
satisfaction in one's self cultivated ; and, final-
ly, that no evils are to be feared but wicked-
ness,—not even death, which is to be sought
when virtue can not otherwise be maintained.
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER III. .
The Ethical System of Kant.
We are now ready to compare with the
foregoing system the doctrine of Kant.
Immanuel Kant, the founder of the Critical
or Transcendental School of German phi-
losophy, was born at Konigsberg, Prussia, in
1724. He was of Scottish descent, the orthog-
raphy of the family name, originally Cant,
having been changed to Kant to prevent the
pronunciation, Tsant. He was a profound
linguist, mathematician, and philosopher; yet
not early did his superior abilities command
public recognition. Not till his forty-sixth
year (1770) was he appointed professor of
logic and metaphysics in the university of his
native city. His life was devoted to study;
and such was his aversion to travel that he
is said never to have gone farther than thirty-
two miles from Konigsberg.
In person he was short and very spare, his
feeble frame and hollow chest betokening an
50 Seneca and Kant.
early death, rather than ^the long and labo-
rious life which was granted to him. While
simple in dress and manners, he was rigidly
methodical in all his habits. Study, diet,
sleep, and exercise were regulated with
mathematical precision. Independence was a
marked trait of his character. During his
student career at the university, he was com-
pelled to maintain a constant struggle with
poverty, yet he preferred to wear a shabby
coat rather than accept any proffers of as-
sistance. When he had risen to eminence he
was visited by throngs of admirers, whom he
took great pleasure in ' entertaining, but al-
ways strictly within the limits of time which
he had marked out for himself.
Although a profound thinker, he was also
interested in lighter themes, and read and re-
read such works as "Tale of a Tub," and
"Hudibras." As a lecturer, he was entertain-
ing and popular, and attracted crowds of stu-
dentsand visitors. His friendships were warm
and lasting. The attachment between him
and the English merchant. Green, has a touch
of romance in it. His manners were agree-
Seneca and Kant. 51
able, and he was entertaining even to chil-
dren. His benevolent disposition is shown
in his liberal bestowments while living, and
the generous disposition of his property at
his death. His calm and meditative life was
protracted to fourscore years, his death oc-
curring in 1804.
His published works are numerous. Per-
haps the best known are his "Critique* of the
Pure Reason," "Critique of the Practical Rea-
son," "Critique of the Faculty of Judgment,"
^'Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone,"
and "A General History of Nature and The-
ory of the Heavens." The following state-
ment of his doctrine has been drawn chiefly
from his "Groundwork (or Fundamental Prin-
ciples) of the Metaphysic of Ethics."
KANT'S ETHICS.
It will be convenient to consider the subject
under the following heads :
I. The Doctrine. II. Its Ground. III.
Its End. IV. Its Postulates.
*0r, Critical Examination.
52 Seneca and Kant.
I, Kant sets out with the assertion that
there is nothing in the world that can be
called absolutely and entirely good but a
good will. This is good, not for the beneficial
effects that it produces, but in and of itself. If
happiness were the true object of nature in
the constitution of man, he has certainly been
very poorly constituted to attain this end.
Instinct would have reached it far more un-
erringly than reason. In fact, the more
purposely a refined mind seeks its own en-
joyment, the less true contentment it finds.
This proves that reason has a higher and
nobler end than happiness ; namely, to pro-
duce in us a good will, not for any ulterior
end, but as a good in itself.*
When, now, Kant comes to develop the
notion of a good will, he finds involved in it
the cognate notion of duty, which must first
be explained. This he finds to be independ-
ent of all ideas of expediency, usefulness,
inclination, or subserviency to other purposes
:
it is an end in itself. It is "the obligation.
*Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten. von Kirchmann's ed., Seite
xa ff. Also, Abbott's and Semple's translations.
Seneca and Kant. 53
to an action, which arises from respect for the
moral law."* Thus my reason declares a
certain course of conduct to be right. This
is for me the moral law. As a rational being,
I must respect its behests, and am obligated
to perform them. This obligation is duty.
This conception of duty, therefore,—wheth-
er we consider its source, as not coming from
without, but as self-imposed by the reason ; or
its essence, as respecting not primarily the
outward action, nor the effects which such ac-
tion might produce, but first of all, the atti-
tude of the actor to the moral law itself,
namely, that of respect,—necessarily leads
us back to the conception of a good will. In
the language of Kant, "The notion of duty
includes that of a good will, although under
certain subjective limitations and hinderances.
These, however, far from concealing it or
rendering it unrecognizable, rather bring it
out by contrast, and make it shine the
brighter,"f
But here we must not confound things
that are apparently the same, but radically
*v. Kirch , p. x3. t^^^^-i P* '4*
54 Seneca and Kant.
different. For example, it is the duty of a
merchant not to overcharge his customers.
(Commercial prudence also dictates the same
course. But actions springing from the latter
motive are utterly void of moral value. It is
also a duty to preserve one's life. Most men
do so from the constitution of their nature.
But only when a man, in the presence of
distress and sorrow, would fain choose death,
yet refuses it, influenced by duty alone, does
his coufse in this respect have any moral
worth. To use Karlt's words: "An action
performed out of duty must entirely exclude
the influence of inclination," and of "every ob-
ject to be gained by it ; so that there remains
nothing that can determine the will, but, ob-
jectively, the law, and, subjectively, pure
reverence for it."*
Now, the first characteristic of the mora)
law is, that it commands, and commandi^
without any condition. Its absolutely un
conditional mandate is, "Thou shalt! thou
oughtest!" The moral law takes the form
of a command, since man is a sensuous as
*lbid., p. 19.
Seneca and Kant. 55
well as rational being, and does not conform
to its requirements without effort and sacrifice.
In the technical language of Kant, "All im-
peratives are expressed by the word ought,
and indicate thereby the relation of an object-
ive law of reason to a will which, by virtue
of its subjective constitution,, is not necessarily
determined by it."*
" Now, all imperatives command either hy-
pothetically or categorically." When the
action commanded is good "only as a means
to something else," the imperative is hypothet-
ical ; but when the action is conceived as good
in itself, that is, as the actiton of a will "which
of itself conforms to reason," the imperative
is categorical. Thus all the precepts of pru-
dence, or skill in the relation of means to
one's greatest welfare, are hypothetical ; " the
action is not commanded absolutely, but only
as a means to another purpose."
But " there is an imperative which com-
mands a certain conduct immediately, without
proposing as a condition any other purpose
to be attained by it. This imperative is cat-
*Ibid., p. 34.
^6 Seneca and Kant.
egorical, * * * and what is essentially-
good in it consists in the mental disposition,
let the consequence be what it will." This
is the imperative of morality. I may have
rules of skill and counsels of prudence, but
only commands of morality;* f
In the case of a holy will,—for example, the
divine,—the imperative would be entirely in-
applicable. "Thoushalt" were misapplied to
such a will, it being already of its own accord
in harmony with the law. But with man the
case is altogether different. His sensuous
nature, his appetites, desires, and passions
are constantly clamoring for gratifications that
are in entire opposition to the moral law. To
be happy is his desire—" a desire which every
finite rational being necessarily has, since he
has unsatisfied wants,"f But happiness is of
empirical origin ; it has no certain basis ; it is
conditioned by circumstances ; it is variable
;
it is selfish. "To promote our happiness,
therefore, never can be an immediate duty
;
still less can it be the principle of all duty.";}:
*v. Kirch., pp. 36-39.
fKritik der pralccischen Vernunft. Abbott's transi. Rem. II., p. 156.
{Ibid., p. 267.
Seneca and Kant. 57
The moral law, on the contrary, utters its im-
perative without any regard to happiness.
Man's obedience, consequently, is never per-
fect, and never rendered without a struggle.
In Kant's words, "The moral law represents
an ideal of holiness not attainable by any
creature—an archetype toward which we are
«ver to approximate. An infinite approxima-
tion toward holiness of will is all that is pos-
sible for man or any other finite being."*
This mandatory character of the law indi-
cates the proper attitude of a finite intelligence
toward it; namely, that of respect or rever-
-ence. Kant will have nothing more nor less
than this. This respect arises from the con-
•ception of a worth and dignity in the law,
before which all self-love falls. Kant has no
patience with any other disposition in the per-
formance of duty. He will not hear of any
Tvillingness, or desire, or pleasure in connec-
tion with it. Such conceptions of duty are
"nothing but moral fanaticism;" they spring
from self-conceit, and "beget a vain, over-
weening, fantastic way of thinking,"f With
"^G. zur Met. d S. Semple's transl., pp. 105-132.
flbid.. p. 134. Abbott, p. 254.
58 Seneca and Kant.
him, duty is downright delving in the heat
and dust; it is painful, humiliating, arduous.
It is work that requires tense muscle and
firm resolve—a constant rowing against the-
stream.
This respect, though gratifying to reason, is.
necessarily painful to sense, since the moral
law disregards the claims of the sensory, and
casts down all self-love and all self-conceit at
a blow.* Yet man, in his self-conceit, is ever
seeking to circumvent the law, and fritter it
down to a means of his own advantage and
happiness, flattering himself that he "needs-
neither spur nor rein;"f that he can be a
volunteer, and, without any command, under-
take its duties spontaneously, and even .witb
love and delight.
The truth is, however, that its "solemrt
majesty" so impresses him with its worthiness-
that he can not avoid, whether he will or not^
feeling a respect for it. This respect is pain-
ful to his self-love, and he would fain be rid
of it. Hence his efforts to find somepurpose^
gratifying to sense, in obedience to the law^^
»Cf. Schwegler, Hist. Phil., pp. 255-6.
|Crit. of Prac. Reason, Abbott's transl., pp. 249^ 254.
Seneca and Kant. 59
and to make conformity to it minister to his
happiness—as if its holy claims were not
supreme and to be subordinate to noth-
ing else!
But suclj conformity is mere legality, no
morality. The unyielding, holy precepts of
the law " never allow our frivolous self-love to
dally with sensory excitement, or plume our-
selves upon our meritorious worth."* Let us
not flatter ourselves that the law is our serv-
ant, to minister to our pleasure and bow to
our caprices ; it is our rightful lord and mas-
ter, justly demanding our obedience. Like
the great law of gravitation in the physical
world, it consults neither our convenience nor
our wishes, but in conscious majesty makes
its unyielding demands peremptorily. " The
grade, then, on the ethical scale, where man
finds himself, is that of reverence toward the
law."f His true moral sentiment is virtue,
not holiness ; he is to be militant, not perfect.
But what is the nature of this law that com-
mands me so authoritatively ? Is it material ?
No ; for " all material principles of morality,
*Ibid., Analytic. Semple's transl., pp. 133-135; Abbott, p. 253.
fCf. Abbott, p. 153.
6o Seneca and Kant.
that is, all theories that propose an object
chosen as determining the will, are one and
all taken from sense and experience, and, be-
ing a posteriori, can not supply a universal law
of action."* These theories are all reducible
to self-love or desire for private happiness
;
not only such as Epicureanism and utilitarian-
ism, that are confessedly based on happiness,
but also the theories of benevolence, moral
sense, perfection, and even obedience to the
will of God. For Kant's theory of obedience
has already aimed to cut up by the roots all
theories of benevolence and perfection. They
are in his view egoistic, and spring out of
self-love. The benevolent man is gratifying
a feeling rather than obeying the law ; the
Stoic, with all his rigor, is seeking for tran-
quillity ; the so-called moral sense, being
sensory, can never promulgate a universal
law ; moreover, it presupposes the existence
and the consciousness of such a law ; and he
asserts that even obedience to the will of God,
without a prior independent principle of mor-
^Ibid., p. X49.
Seneca and Kant. 6i
ality, can be a motive only by reason of the
happiness expected therefrom.
In Kant's words: "We stand under a
discipline of reason, and in all our maxims
must not forget our subjection to it, nor with-
draw anything from it, nor by an egotistic
presumption diminish aught of the authority
of the law ( although our own reason gives,
it ), so as to set the determining principle of
the will anywhere else but in the law itself
and in respect for the law. Duty and obliga-
tion are the only names that we must give to-
our relation to the moral law." And again:
" The majesty of duty has nothing to do with
enjoyment of life ; it has its special law and
its special tribunal,and though the two should
be never so well shaken together to be given
well mixed, like medicine, to the sick soul, yet
they will soon separate of themselves, or the
forn/er will not act, and the moral life will fade
away irrecoverably."*
Why should,the moral law command me to-
seek my happiness ? That instinct is already
inseparably rooted in my nature. The truth
* Analytic of Pure Practical Reason. Abbott's trans., in sub., pp. 249-60..
62 Seneca and Kant.
is, it does not, but commands something en-
tirely irrespective of my happiness. All these
theories are only " maxims " * of my own
willing,—empirical, partial, selfish ; they can
none of them be universally applied. On the
contrary, " Reason utters her inexorable com-
mand, and holds out to the appetites no pros-
pect nor promise whatsoever." When she
gives her comijiand to abstain from lying, it is
utterly independent of all ideas of prudence
or congeniality to feeling.
As, therefore, all material principles are
reducible to self-love, and as self-love affords
only a conditional law, a mere " maxim " of
willing, the law, as a priori, must be purely
rational, that is, formal and universal, and may
be stated thus : " Act always according to
maxims which thou canst wish to be accepted
as universal laws."f Weighed in this balance,
all my maxims of prudence and self-seeking
are found wanting. Have I a right to promise
falsely, though in need ? to live a life of ease,
because I happen to have a competency ? to
* Rules of conduct derived from experience, and hence variable, subjec'
to opinion, and not binding; upon all.
t Grund. zur Met. der Sicten, Seite 44.
Seneca and Kant. 63
take my own life, because of pain or poverty
or trouble ? These and a thousand similar
questions, when put to the test of universal
applicability, at once fall to the ground. I
can not conceive a case to which this law
would not apply. All the maxims of my will
must therefore strictly conform to this lavir;
then the rational and the empirical, the formal
and the material, are united in a symmetrical
whole, in which Reason is supreme and inde-
pendent, "the author of her own principles."*
This last expression is significant as showing
the origin of Kant's moral law, and the
character of his whole system.
Now the fact that man can thus break loose
from the chains of the sensory and obey the
higher law of reason, constitutes the dignity
of his nature ; and this self-determining power
Kant calls the " Autonomy of the Will." In
distinction from this, when he fails to conform
to it, and yields to the sensory, he falls into
the chain of mere mechanical causation; he
is no longer self-determined in the true sense
;
a foreign law rules, and this is " Heteronomy
* Ibid, von Kirchmaniif p. 77.
64 Seneca and Kant.
of the Will." The autonomy of a holy will
( the divine ) is perfect and under the law of
necessity, while that of finite beings, not
altogether good, is under the law of obliga-
tion. * "Autonomy," says Kant, "is the
sole principle of ethics,"f for all the rest of
man's activity, as we have seen, is void of
moral value.
II. Let us now consider the ground of the
doctrine above presented. The doctrine of
obligation to autonomy, just stated, presents
man in a twofold aspect, (i) as giving law j
(2) as subject to law ; as rational and sensory ;
as under dynamical and under mechanical
laws. He is therefore a citizen of two worlds^
with a "twofold set of laws regulating the
conduct and exercise of his powers." As a
V In no one step of nature is there any alternative ; from what already
]s, that step which isnow proximately future must be taken» and must be sa
taken as has already been conditioned. There is no autonomy, no will, na
personality, consequently no liberty The choices of animal
nature are component links in this iron chain of necessity as truly as the
effects of gravity. It is controlled by appetite and thus by nature, not by-
its own behest in reason and thus in liberty. Hence the animal is ever
thing and never person. Man, also, by as much as he is sentient, is animali
only, . . . Except as man has a higher endowment than a sentient nature
.... in which he may resist and subjugate all the clamorous appetites of
sense, and hold them in perpetual servitude to hisown ethical end, he neither
has nor can have any personality nor responsibility, inasmuch as otherwise
he possesses no will in liberty.—Hickok's Rational Psychology, pp. 441-3.
tAnal, der prak. Ver. Abbott, p, 169,
Seneca and Kant. 65
part of the world of sense, he is but a "phe-
nomenon,"* subject to the same laws of
mechanical causation and necessity as other
phenomena. Were this all, it would follow
that every act takes place necessarily, by
virtue of conditions that happened in past
time, now out of his power, and therefore he
could not be free. Or, if exempted from the
law of physical necessity, his actions would be
in the domain of blind chance.
On the other hand, were I independent of
the physical system, were I a pure " noume-
non," * I should be entirely liberated from
the law of mechanical causation. No condi-
tion of the past, no appetites of the present,
could enthrall me or bring me under any
heteronomy of will. But I am neither of
these, and yet in a sense both. I am both a
V Acccrding to Kant« noumena are the essential grounds of things as
cognized by reason alone, apart from the limitations of the senses ; or as we
may conceive them to be cognized by the divine mind. Kant calls them
also things-in-themselves. In distinction from these, objects, as they appear
through the senses, are called phenomena. Here the words are used for
purely rational beings and purely physical beings,- Cf. Dr. N. Porter : "The
^eal as thus opposed to the phenomenal is called by Kant the noumenon, or
thing in itself. This can not be discerned by the senses, nor can it be ap-
prehended by consciousness. It ever flits from our grasp, and leaves phe-
nomena only in our possession, as shadows which do not satisfy us but
point to something whichwe never can reach."—Human Intellect, p. 642.
66 Seneca and Kant.
*'noumenon" and a "phenomenon." As
Poetter says : „91I§ Snoumenon giebt bet SKenfc^
baS ©ittengefel ; als jtnnlic^eS 2Be[en ifl er Diefem ®e»
fe^e unterworfen." And again : „3n bet Ktitifber
i)ra!tif(^en Sernunft binbicirt alfo ^ant bem aJienfc^en
ein fc^B})ferifd^e3 SermSgen. Sic t^eoreti[^e SBernunft
ifi in leinet SBeifc fc^6j)ferifc^, fonbern nut etiennenb
;
biejJtaftifc^cetbaut fic^ felbft i^e 2Selt"*
But as a rational agent, man must consider
himself a member, not so much of the sensi-
ble, as of the supersensible system, a system
whose laws are entirely independent of me-
chanical influences, and have their grounds in
reason only.f Now the fundamental fact in a
rational will isfreedom. "We must attribute
to every rational being possessing a will, the
idea of freedom, under which idea alone can
he act.";J: This freedom is the power of leg-
islating for himself, and of determining his
own causality accordingly: this constitutes
true autonomy of will. In Kant's words,
*As a noumenon man gives the law of morals; as a sensuous beinff
he is subject to this law. Accordingly, in the CriticalExamination of the
•^Practical Reason^ Kant claims for man a creative power. The pure (spec*
ulative) reason is in no way 'creative, but only cognitive; the practical
(moral) constructs its own world.—Poetter's Gesch. der Phil. Theil II.,
pp. 132-4.
t Grund. 2ur Met. der Bitten ; v. Kirch., p. 83.
J Ibid., Bp.76-7.
Seneca and Kant. 6y
before quoted, " Reason must regard herself
as the author of her own principles ;" and
again : " As a rational being, and hence as
belonging to the supersensible world, man
can never think of the causality of his
will but under the idea of freedom."* Moral
freedom may be defined, then, negatively, as
the will's independence of the sensory— " of
everything except the moral law ;" and, posi-
tively, as the power of self-legislation and
self-determination.
The freedom of man is further apparent
when we remember that the world of nou-
mena, according to Kant, contains and under-
lies the world of phenomena. Hence I, as
rational, as a noumenon, must regard myself
as more immediately connected with the
former,f The necessitarians have greatly
erred here ; for while recognizing man as a
rational being, they have applied to his reason
the same laws of causality that belong to him
as a phenomenon—an evident absurdity.
Not less absurd is it to trace the determina-
• Ibid., p. 83.
t Ibid., p. 83.
68 Seneca and Kant.
tions of the will to remote psychological
causes acting upon the sensations;* for "this
comes at last to, and is in no wise distinguish-
able from, physical necessity,"f If, now, we
are asked to define analytically the freedom
of an active cause, Kant pronounces it ulti-
mate and incomprehensible. Yet, as we can
not think without a category, it may be re-
ferred, in his scheme of categories, to Causal-
ity, of the class Dynamical.
III. Passing now to consider the end of
the law, it is remarked by Kant that every-
thing in the realm of ends has either a price
(^reis) or a dignity (aBfirbe). What is-
subservient to human wants and wishes, has a
market-price ; but that which constitutes the
condition by virtue of which alone anything
can be an end in itself, has not merely a
relative value, that is, a price, but an intrinsic
worth or dignity. Morality alone is this con-
dition, since only by it does man become an,
end in himself, and a legislator in the realm
of ends.:}: All other ends are eudsemonistie
• Of. H. Spencer's Theory.
t Semple, p. 149.
t G. zur M. d. S., von Kirch., p, 60 ff.
Seneca and Kant. 69
and have consequently a price, proportioned
to their capacity to yield pleasure ; they bring
man also under the dominion of mechanical
causation.
The dignity or worthiness, therefore, not
the happiness of man, is the end of the law.*
And this respects not himself alone, but
every rational being, who is both a legislator
and subject of this realm. " Everything in
the created world may be used as a means,
man alone excepted." He only is an end in
himself. Hence we may now give a content
to the formal law before announced, and lay
down a second principle of morality as fol-
lows : "Act so as to use mankind, both in
thine own person and the persons of others,
ever as an end and never'merely as a means,"f
Or, combining the two principles in one
:
"Act according to the ideal will of all
rational beings, as the source of a universal
legislation."J
*The moral rule, or ultimate rule of rights we have already seen tobe
that a reasonable being ought to act reasonably ; or, as it might otherwise
be stated, that all voluntary action should be held subordinate to the dif*
nity of the rational spirit.—Hickok ; MoralScience, p. 38.
t G. z. Met. der S., p. 53.
X Ibid., pp. s6-9-
70 Seneca and Kant.
IV. Let us now briefly consider the postu-
lates of this doctrine. Is reason perfectly
satisfied with the end just announced, namely,
the worthiness of man? No. By the con-
stitution of our nature we desire happiness,
but this theory provides only for worthiness
of happiness. Reason plainly intimates that
the ideal end of man, the summum bonum,
would be the union of holiness and happiness.
But that state is clearly unattainable here.
We can only approximate toward holiness
;
and happiness—such are the obstructions of
sense—often fails to correspond even to the
degree of virtue that is attained. We must,
therefore, postulate :
1. An endless continuation of our exist-
ence, in which, by an endless progress in
virtue, holiness may be at length attained.
In other words, the theory presupposes the
immortality of the soul.
2. As holiness would not realize the high-
est good without happiness, we must postulate
also a being, who, as common ruler in the
" kingdoms of nature and grace," will effect
the harmony required by reason between
Seneca and Kant. 71
them. In other words, we must postulate the
existence of God.
3. We have already adverted to the fact
that reason requires the subjection of the
sensory to the rational. The categorical im-
perative of the moral law, and the conviction
of our moral freedom, require us to postulate
this subjection, which may be expressed thus :
"Thou canst, for thou oughtest."
It would be interesting to consider the
application of Kant's ethical principles in his
" Elementology of Ethics," his casuistry, and
his views on religion. Our limits allow only a
passing notice of the latter. In his " Religion
Within the Limits of Reason Alone," the
most unhappy of his works in its antagonism
to revelation, Kant distinguishes sharply be-
tween moral faith, that is, the faith of reason,
and historical or statutory faith, that is, faith
in a revelation, and denies that the historical
element is binding as an article of faith.
On this point he seems to be almost in
harmony with Origen's theory of revelation,
that the historical parts of Scripture serve
only as a web for the inweaving of divine
72 Seneca atid Kant.
mysteries.* "To suppose," says Kant, "histor-
ical faith incumbent as a duty is superstition.
Yet moral faith always allows a man to be-
lieve in the historical, in so far as he finds the
latter conducive to enlivening his purely moral
and religious sentiments."
A dogma or myth is worthless unless it has
a moral, that is, a rational, content. Hence the
statutory element is ever to be secondary to
the moral.f If the reverse prevails, priestcraft
and superstition follow. In short, he alleges
that everything man fancies he can do, over
and above good moral conduct, to render
himself acceptable to God, (for example*
prostrating himself to the earth, or using im-
ages in adoration,) is mere mock-service of
the Deity. $
On the other hand, his doctrine of deprav-
ity was rigorous enough for the most ortho-
dox ; moreover, on the visible and invisible
church, and the Kingdom of God on Earth,
he made valuable contributions to theology.
* Ongcn's Works, T. & T. Clark's Ed.,Vol. I., pp. 291-343.
t Cf. Schwegler, Hist. Phil., pp. 260-1 ; and Emerson, Conduct of Life,
p. iSi.
X Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft, pp. a6o-z. .
Seneca and Kant. 73
. To recapitulate : Kant teaches that the
supreme end of man is not happiness, but a
good will ; that this is an intrinsic, uncondi-
tioned good; that only respect for the moral
law gives moral worth to an action; that
this law is announced by reason, and that its
commands are categorical and peremptory
;
that obligation to obey it is duty, and duty
respects not happiness ; that respect or rev-
erence for the law is the only feeling with
which duty should be performed ; that any
other obedience is mere legality, not morality
;
that holiness or moral perfection is in this life
impossible, only a will like the divine being
holy ; that the law, as given by the pure
reason, must transcend all material ends and
all mere maxims of willing and be purely
formal and universal ; that fitness for universal
application is the formula for all moral action
;
that man, as rational, is free, but, as a part of
nature, is controlled by necessity ; that the
rational is superior to nature, and hence man
possesses autonomy of will ; that as morality
is an end in itself, every human being, as the
subject of morality, must be regarded as an
74 Seneca and Kant.
end, and never merely as a means ; that the
intelligent application of the formula thus
contemplates all rational beings ; that worth-
iness, not happiness, is the end of the law
;
that, as rational, we must postulate the
supremacy of reason over sense, the exist-
ence of God, and the immortality of the
soul ; that the moral precepts of Scripture^
being rational, are binding upon all, but faith
in its history is only voluntary ; that true re-
ligion differs from morality only in recogniz-
ing our duties as divine commands ; and,
finally, that moral conduct is incumbent on
every one, but worship is only tutelary to
this end, and optional.
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER IV.
A Comparison and Criticism ofthe Two Systems.
We are now ready to compare the two
systems, and to offer some comments upon
them.
From the foregoing presentation, it is clear
that with three vital and fundamental points
of Stoicism, Kant is in entire harmony. In
asserting the dualism and antagonism of
sense and reason in man, in demanding the
supremacy of reason, and in affirming that
by virtue of reason he is a law unto himself,
Kant's language is as emphatic as Seneca's.
The great doctrine of "the autonomy of
reason and the subjection of passion" con-
stitutes the essence of both systems, and
Kant is essentially a Stoic. What, then, are
their points of difference ?
I. The first thing that attracts the reader's
attention, perhaps, if we may speak of such a
yS Seneca and Kant.
point in this connection, is a total difference
of style. Seneca is terse, pointed, without
ornament, and frequently harsh. His sen-
tences are brief and epigrammatic—some-
times to obscurity. Kant's style is also
considered sufficiently obscure, but the ob-
scurity proceeds from an opposite cause.
Long, involved sentences, clause piled upon
clause, and modification after modification,
characterize his style.* This quality, com-
bined with his peculiarly technical language,
exacts the closest attention of the reader to
seize the thought. De Quincey aptly liken-
ed his sentences to the cumbersome English
stage-coach of his time, of which capacity
was the chief recommendation. While dif-
fering widely in this respect, they are not
unlike, however, in their loose, digressive
arrangement, unnecessary and wearisome rep-
etition, and general lack of orderly presen-
tation.
2. One can not fail to notice, also, that
Kant brings a more powerful mind to the:
investigation of the subject. No one will
* Cf. Bowco's Modern Phil., Introduction on Kant.
Seneca and Kant. 79
complain of the vapidness of his thoughts,
however ill expressed, which can not always
be said of Seneca. His grasp is masterly;
and even when we can not agree with him,
we are bound to respect him. Kant has
grappled with the difificult problems of the
will, and the relation of mind to matter, and
thrown much light upon thern, while these
subjects have been left unexplained or in
confusion by Seneca.
3. Seneca's theory of physics involved
him in inextricable fatalism, with which the
duties enjoined by him remain in unreconciled
and irreconcilable antagonism. Kant's doc-
trine of " noumenon" and "phenomenon"
leaves man a sphere of freedom, and his
autonomy is thus rational and consistent.
4. Perhaps the most radical diflerence
between them is found in their doctrines of
happiness. Seneca, in harmony with the
other Stoics, assumes the perfectibility of
man in the present state, by teaching that
happiness or tranquillity is indissolubly con-
nected with virtue. Kant utterly rejects this
tenet of Stoicism, and affirms that in the
8o Seneca and Kant.
present life virtue and happiness find no cor-
respondence. Yet he admits the theoretical
truth of the doctrine, by postulating a future
state in which this harmony will at length
be consummated.
5. The Stoic theory of life as a discipline,
wavers between self-discipline and discipline
administered by the Deity ; with Kant, it is
self-discipline throughout.
6. With Seneca, the moral law has an
author. It was established by the Deity,
who obeys it himself. With Kant, no per-
sonal origin is assigned exterior to the mind,
and we are taught that it is the child of rea-
son only.
7. Kant emphasizes the doctrine of free-
dom as the glory of man and the ground of
all virtue ; the Stoic finds the chief exhibition
of virtue in endurance, and submission to fate.
While Seneca's system, therefore, is essen-
tially passive, Kant's system is an active,
aggressive course of self-culture.
8. The Stoics discouraged metaphysics
proper, and art, as well as all active occupa-
tions, enjoining retirement and contemplation
Seneca and Kant. 8i
rather than a public career; Kant, although
retired himself, took a deep interest in all
these.
9. Finally, the Stoics, with uncertain and
pantheistic views of the future, justified the
taking of one's own life; Kant pronounces
suicide a crime of the darkest hue.
Having thus compared the two systems,
let us now look at each separately. The
great excellence of Kant's system appears
in the lofty ideal of virtue which he sets be-
fore us. He has climbed heights that are
rugged and steep, but he breathes an atmos-
phere purer and more invigorating than any
theory yet presented, with happiness as its
supreme end, allows its advocates to reach.
With him, virtue is a struggle, not a grat-
'ification; a debt, instead of a charity; a
sacrifice, and not a luxury. Duty is high-
er than happiness, and heroism than self-
seeking. The grossness, sensualism, and
egoism, which tend inevitably to follow all
theories of eudsemonism, are evidently struck
down at a blow. Naturalism or panthe-
ism fares no better at his hands. Con-
6
82 Seneca and Kant.
trary to the nature-worship and fatalism of a
Spinoza, man is superior to nature, and free.*
Here again the avenues to recklessness and
passion are closed; for good and evil are
not mere "relative conceptions" for man to
trifle with, nor can he complacently ascribe
all his acts, evil and good, to the will of God."}*
Freedom brings responsibility, or, to use
Kant's expression, obligation to autonomy,
and man must respect his own worthiness as
an end in itself. This part of Kant's doctrine
unquestionably stands on an immovable basis.
Equally elevated and noble is his rever-
ence for the majesty of the moral law. One
is reminded of the exulting veneration of
the psalniist for the law of God. J Kant
grows enthusiastic. For once the icy atmos-
phere becomes genial, as he relaxes from his
imperturbable rigorand exclaims, "Two things
fill the mind with ever new and increasing
admiration and awe, the oftener and longer
we reflect upon them: the starry heavens
above and the moral law within."
||
And
* Of. Wuttke's Christ. Ethics, Vol. I, p. 327 ff.
t Ueberweg, Hist. Phil , Vol. II., pp. 72, 77 sup. J Ps. cxix.
I Beschltiss der Kritik der praktischen Vernunft : also, Ueberweg, Hist*
Phil., Vol. II., p. 184.
Seneca and Kant. 83
»
surely no one, of whatever cteed, who be-
lieves in virtue at all, will deny him his meed
of praise for holding aloft the torch to erring
man, and bidding him look to the noble and
imperishable.
But, with all its excellences, the system of
Kant contains very serious defects.
I. The means by which I am to recognize
the moral law in any given case, is its fitness
for universal application. But fitness for uni-
versality is an abstraction, a mere algebraic
formula. How shall I know what is fiXto_be
universal without a rule to guide me? Is it
a sufficient description of gravitation to say
that it is universal in nature, or fit to be so ?
Unless I already know what the good and
the right is, or have a Socratic demon to
whisper it in my ear, I may be as helpless
with Kant's rule as before. In short, Kant
has taken the sign instead of the substance,
—a very unerring sign, indeed, to those who
can recognize it, but not the substance ; a
guide to the town, instead of the town.
As Cousin says, "By separating duty from
interest, which ruins it, and from sentiment,
84 Seneca and Kant.
which enervates it, Kant restored to eth-
ics its true character. He elevated himself
very high in the century of Helvetius, in,
elevating himself to the holy law of duty;
but still he did not ascend high enough, he
did not reach the reason itself of duty."
And again, " If one act must be perform-
ed, and another not, it is because there is
manifestly an essential difference between
these two acts. To found the good on ob-
ligation, instead of founding obligation on
the good, is therefore to take the effect for
the cause, is to make the principle follow
from the conclusion." *
The entire import of Kant's formula is,
" Exclude all material motives, all considera-
tions of desire, inclination, interest, personal
happiness, and the like, and obey only the
law which reason announces. You may know
this law by the utter absence of empirical
elements, of all limitations of time and place.
It is binding upon all, ever and everywhere."
But what is this more than the Stoics long
ago uttered? "Obey reason and not im-
* Lectures on the True, the Beautiful, and the Good, Lect. XIV,, p.
184 ff.
Seneca and Kant. 85
pulse." They gave, as precepts for obeying
reason, the somewhat ambiguous injunctions,
" Conform to nature ; be at harmony with
yourself; be consistent." In universality, it
is true, Kant gives a soniewhat clearer sign.
But the chief value of his rule, like that of
the Stoics, is negative. It is lofty and clear
in what it prohibits, not so clear in what it
enjoins.
2. But when we look a little farther, we
find a personal element in the rule which
makes it still more objectionable. " Act ac-
cording to maxims thou canst wish to serve
as universal laws." Then the element of fit-
ness for universality is to be determined by
the wish of the actor. If, therefore, any
ultimate standard, any definite guidance, is
to be furnished by the rule, it presupposes
that all men agree as to what is fit to be
universal—a proposition which, if true, needs
to be cleared up, to say the least. To dis-
miss the fundamental principle of ethics with
the single trait of fitness for universality,
quietly assuming that the conception is in-
delibly fixed in the mind of every human
86 Seneca and Kant.
being, child and philosopher, savage and
cultured, is certainly a petitio principii,
since the essence of the matter is manifestly
untouched. And, furthermore, Kant here
falls into the empiricism that he so much
dreads and detests, since the essential mat-
ter is not scientifically announced, but refer-
red to individual experience.
Even if we say with Kant, Cudworth, and
others that a sense of right, a recognition of
the eternal and immutable right, is implanted
in every rational nature {inter deos et homines
commumo juris est. Cic. de Leg.), when we
have secured obedience to reason, have we
therefore secured all ?
Suppose, for the argument, that we grant
'
the postulated supremacy of reason ; that
we conceive all mankind as exercising sa
complete control over their instincts, ap-
petites, and sensibilities in general, that they
might be considered as divested of all these
troublesome elements except reverence for
the moral law; suppose, further, that the
ideas of faith, redemption, and salvation
should be universally extinguished; that
Seneca and Kant. 87
all revelations from God should be destroy-
ed, all statutes enacted by society annulled
;
that all the positive institutions of society
for judicial, penal, and devotional purposes
—courts, prisons^ churches, etc.—should be
abolished, and that all influence of hered-
ity, habit, prejudice, etc. should henceforth
cease ; in short, that there should be ab-
solutely nothing prescriptive in morals from
any quarter. We should then have perfect
autonomy, perfect freedom, perfect individu-
alism. Should we also have perfect morals?
Would these rational creatures, with but a
single sentiment that could express itself,
meet the requirements of the moral law, or
be able to make an intelligent use of the
formula ? Far from it. One contingency yet
remains, even in these most favorable sur-
roundings. A judgment must be formed as
to what is fit to be universal, and this, i>ot
only in the simple, but in all the complex
relations of life ;• not only by those of lofty
intellectual endowment, but by the average,
the mediocre, the dwarf. Granting that a
few giant intellects, like Kant, may do well
88 Seneca and Kant.
in carrying out such a formula (though they
must be painfully conscious of many mis-
takes), the mass of mankind lack even the
intellectual capacity to make such a law
serviceable.
But what of the "Golden Rule?" Does
not the same objection apply to it ? To this
it may be answered that when I am asked
to do to others as I would have them do to
me, an appeal is made to my self-love as a
measure to apply to my conduct toward oth-
ers—a measure, for mankind in general, far
more tangible and applicable than the judg-
ment as to what is fit to be universal. Fur-
thermore, if the "Golden Rule" be considered
only a formal principle, it is complemented
by the positive precept of love. In Christian
ethics, therefore, we do not find the indefinite-
ness and inapplicability that belong to the
Kantian system.
3. But does Kant's postulated supremacy
of reason correspond with the fact ? Accord-
ing to Kant himself, there is a deep and dark
corruption in man's nature, an inherent prone-
ness to evil ; and this is not without the daily
Seneca and Kant. 89
confirmation of experience. The majority of
mankind do not obey the categorical impera-
tives of the reason as such; they are restrain-
ed by religion, custom, fear, the civil law, and
other "material" motives; they seek the
pleasures of sense and appetite; and hence
.are under heteronomy of will. For them
the postulated supremacy of reason is a
contradiction, their alleged superiority as
*'noumena" over their sensual natures as
"phenomena" a mockery, and the resulting
freedom claimed for them a nonentity. They
.have fallen from their autonomy, or they
never reached it, and are now mere links in
the chain of mechanical causation.
And if, as rational' beings, they have fallen
into heteronomy, by what power, according
to Kant, shall they ever be restored to
autonomy ? Will the power that was insuf-
ficient to keep them from falling be compe-
tent to restore them when fallen ?
4. Again, the whole system is cold, ab-
-stract, and impersonal. There is a law, but
no lawgiver or judge, urfless we assign to
reason those difficult functions. As Mar-
90 Seneca and Kant.
tensen says, "When unmixed, disinterested
reverence for law, for the majesty of duty,
is mentioned as the motive of duty, though
we certainly can not refuse our esteem for
his motive, yet neither can we acknowledge
it as the highest." * /_JFor not the relation ta
an impersonal law, but only the personal
relation of adoring love and gratitude to God
himself, can produce the most sincere motive
to action in the kingdom of personality. And
again, how can mere law bind me, call me to-
account, summon me before its judgment-
seat ?f / For the mass of mankind, how inap-
plicable and useless were such a law as Kant
has announced ! $ Conceive, for example, aa
Esquimau or a Papuan rising to this cold
and sublime altitude, where all desire and
pleasure, all interest and sympathy are left be-
^ Martensen, Christ. Ethics, pp. 319-350.
t Ibid., in sub.
I Reason I best and holiest gift of Heaven and bond of union with the
Giver I The high title by which the majesty ofman claims precedence above-
all other living creatures I Mysterious faculty, the mother of conscience,
f language, of tears, and of smiles I . . . But man is something beside Rea-
son, because his Reason never acts by itself, but mu^t clothe itself in the
substance of individual Understanding and specific Inclination, in order to*
become a reality and an object of consciousness and experience
Hence the moral laws of the intellectual world, as far as they are deducible-
from pure Intellect, are never perfectly applicable to our mixed and sensi.
tive nature.—Coleridge, Prin. of Pol. Knovi-l., Kssay IV., adfin.
Seneca and Kant. 91
hind, and there dedicating himself reverentially
to the categorical imperatives of the moral
law ! Surely Kant's system is esoteric indeedj
considering the nature of man, it would find
audience fit, but very few.
Just here we see the power of Christianityj
for it not only teaches, but affords training
and help ; extends the sympathy of man, and
commends to the mercy of God. And with
instruction, and more than instruction, do
men need sympathy. To the weak, the ir-
resolute, the fallen, how often is mere teach-
ing powerless ! For them, Kant, beckoning
upward and coldly saying, " Reason ! Au-
tonomy ! Thou oughtest 1" is but sounding
the note of despair. Sympathy and help,
divine and human, alone can restore them to
true ,rationality. And the cross will never
cease to be powerful so long as it is the
symbol of tears—the emblem of all that is
gracious and loving in God and man.
5. Another obvious criticism of Kant's
system is his unscientific treatment of the
sensibilities. He degrades them unduly by
classing them with the appetites in an indis-
92 Seneca and Kant.
criminate mass, and placing them all in an-
tithesis to the moral law. Then virtue ceases
to be virtue the moment one desires it. A
man must ever drag himself into obedience,
and obey under the lash of command. Rev-
erence, not cheerfulness, is to be the feeling
with which he performs every duty. Think
of the duties of friendship, or the family cir-
cle, performed in such a spirit! Is, then, a
kindness less a kindness because it is render-
ed cheerfully ? Or is its virtue enhanced by
our knowing that it was bestowed under a
stern sense of the categorical imperatives of
the moral law, and after a due calculation as
to its fitness to furnish a maxim for universal
application? Schiller's satirical scruple of
conscience was well aimed at this vulnerable
point of Kant's philosophy thus:
"The friends whom I love I gladly would serve.
But to this inclination incites*me
;
And so I am forced from virtue to swerve,
Since my act through affection delights me."
The doubter is admonished as follows:
"The friends whom thou lov'st thou must first seek to scorn.
For to no other way cai^ I guide thee;
•Tis alone with disgust thou canst rightly perform
The acts to which duty would lead thee."*
•Schwegler's Hist. Phil., p. 256.
Seneca and Kant. 93,
The truth is, Kant confounds finding pleas-
ure in virtue with seelcing virtue for the sake
of pleasure. The two ideas are sufficiently
distinct, and the former not nearly so absurd
as the latter. Not by any means was it im-
moral for one of old to say, " I delight to do'
thy will, O God." His cheerful obedience
was certainly nobler than the grudging, pain-
fully-rendered service of others. And what
shall we say of him who has lost friends,
fortune, health—all but virtue ? Shall we
deny him the last and only succor—the con-
solation and comfort, the sustaining power
that it affords?
6. Kant's system, further, is one of ab-
solute individualism. In the pure individual-
ity of his own reason, he arrogates to himself
the settlement of all questions of morals and
religion, and will neither receive instruction
nor brook interference. Kant would have
every man pursue the journey of life without
chart, or guide, or fellowship, trusting to rea-
son alone. Not a ray of light must come
on his path from God, or nature, or history, or
experience. No cheerful song from others
^4 Seneca and Kant.
may gladden his ear, no song dare he sing
himself; in reverence and solitude must he
thread his way through the wilderness of life,
as if he were to be the first and only trav-
eller.
7. In this complete individualism we find
also extreme self-sufficiency. If there is a
God, he is dumb or unheard. Nature reveals
nothing concerning him, inspires no feelings
toward him : it speaks only of blind mech-
anism and fate. Man's origin and destiny are
unfathomed mysteries, left in the profoundest
silence ; nor is it even hinted that the gift of
reason would impose certain obligations to
the Giver. Reason is deified, and man be-
comes his own god.
Far more rational was Schleiermacher, who
found in man a sense of dependence on a
Superior Power, and made this the basis of
his theological system. In this feeling, he
declared, religion has its root. Hence spring
duty, conscience, obedience, prayer, trust,
hope, effort. Hence the need, and herein a
proof of revelation, with its divine command
to love man equally, God supremely. Hence
Seneca and ICant. 95
in redemption, as tne central thought of reve-
lation, are found those personal, animating
motives to a holy life, which spring from
gratitude and love, and which the cold, ab-
stract dictates of the reason are of themselves
powerless to furnish. Surely this accords
with our inmost experience.
8. Finally, Kant's moral system, however
noble and helpful in some aspects, is, in its
impersonality of the moral law (whose ulti-
mate origin who can tell?), in its placing
morality above religion, and in its ignoring
all revelation, essentially one of pure ration-
alism and skepticism. His rigid doctrine of
depravity undermines his system theoretically,
by taking away its necessary support, name-
ly, the postulated supremacy of reason; and,
practically, it is ill adapted to have any power
over men.
It would have been exceedingly interesting,
ifwe could have had the record of Kant's inner
experience, and have known exactly how far
his doctrine consoled him. Unfortunately,the
evidence is somewhat conflicting. It is cer-
tain that he was born with a melancholy
96 Sen^a and Kant.
temperament, and that he believed himself to
have largfely subdued it by "force of will."
He even published an essay on the power of
the will to effect this object. At times hewas
remarkably cheerful and happy, exclaiming, "Is
it possible to conceive any human being enjoy-
ing better health than I do?" His duties tO'
his fellow-men were discharged with scrupu-
lous fidelity. He was generous. By nature
or habit he enjoyed a victory of intellect over
the passions that rankle in so many bosoms.
His attitude to Scripture was not altogether
hostile. He quotes many of its doctrines
with approval, and declares the teachings of
the New Testament the best that the world
had yet seen.* But, alas! revelation was to
him only a system of doctrine, not a story
of redemption ; his supremacy of reason
found no room for faith, but disdained and
excluded it. And so faith brought him no
angels of mercy to soothe his parting hours.
He could not confide in a Savior whom he
rejected. He could only find a negative
comfort in the thought that he had never
*Abbott's Memoir of Kant, and Dial, of Prac. Reas., pp. 325-8, with Note.
Seneca and Kant. 97
»
consciously injured any one. The world to
come was an unbroken mystery, and he pro-
fessed an entire ignorance of what the future
might bring him.
It is said, indeed, that, having reached his
four-score years, he awaited death with resig-
nation, if not with welcome. On a certain
occasion he said, "Gentlemen, I do not fear
to die. I assure you, as in the presence of
God, that if this very night suddenly the
summons to death were to reach me, I should
bear it with calmness, should raise my hands
to heaven and say, 'Blessed be God!' Were
it indeed possible that such a whisper as this
could reach my ear, ' Four-score years thou
hast lived, in which thou hast inflicted much
evil upon thy fellow-men,' the case would be
different."
But, according to others, this readiness to
die arose not from hope and cheerfulness, but
from his confessed weariness of life, and "his
sense of the misery and uselessness of fur-
ther existence."*
Even taking the most favorable view,
* Cf. Abbott's Memoir, and Haven's Hist. Phil., pp, 347-353.
98 Seneca and Kant.
we should have to say, "Heroic utterance
this for a Stoic in a heathen age ! but not
for the philosopher of a Christian land."
Why self-complacently esteem a! self-spun
system a^ove all works of gods or men be-
sides? Why prefer the pale, cold light of
the moon to the warming, fructifying bright
ness of the sun ?
Reverting now to the Stoics, we must ob-
serve in their system, also, as in Kant's :
I. An excessive individualism. The Stoic,
in his seclusion, has no conscious place in
history ; no sympathy with his race ; scarcely
any with his nation. The past inspires him
with no veneration, the future with no hope.
Though surrounded by his fellow-beings, he
is as solitary as Crusoe, or a shipwrecked
mariner drifting on the ocean.
It is true that there were a few alleviations
to this solitude. The doctrines that he held
had become somewhat crystallized, so that
experience might in part light the way for
the disciple. His individualism was further
modified by his pantheistic views. Borne
along by fate, he would sooner or later sink
Seneca and Kant, 99
into the common mass of undistinguishable
being, his identity forever lost. Foreseeing
that grave of his hopes, he would be com-
pelled with his German confrere to sing
:
„Dl^ne Summer fc^Iaf id^ ein,
Dl^ne §offnung aufjuftel^'n." *
But in spite of these modifications, his isola-
tion in reference to society, customs, laws,
traditions, history, and religion, was as com-
plete as Kant's.
What, now, were the consequences of this
isolation? Evidently an offensive self-suffi-
ciency, a haughty egotism, a contemptuous ar-
rogance toward all the irrational herd, who
were complacently assumed to be yet under
the dominion of passion. There could .not
fail to be a wide breach of feeling between
the two classes ; and the sage, however iso-
lated he in reality was, was necessarily re-
garded as a member of a self-constituted
aristocracy.
2. The undue rigor of their doctrine of
apathy. So important a factor in the world
>(*Without grief 1 fall asleep,
Without hope of rising agun.
—Kuckert's ,,Pie sterbende Blume."
icx) Seneca and Kant.
as feeling can not be wholly ignored and ob-
literated without disastrous results. But why
class all the feelings together as evil ? Root
out most ruthlessly envy, malice, revenge, av-
arice, and all their kindred ; but why crush
love, gratitude, sympathy, and mercy? In
truth, amid the foes of virtue, Kant and Sen-
eca would sacrifice its best friends. Admitting
that virtue is "conformity to right reason,"
how can it thrive, whence its motive-power,
unless constantly re-enforced by the better
sensibilities ?* The Stoic of necessity acquir-
ed a harsh and repulsive character, destitute
of the grace and beauty of true manhood.
Such rigor could not but be followed by the
most violent reactions ; and, accordingly, the
grossest lewdness, and, as some allege, even
cannibalism were found among them.
It is in endurance and suffering that the
excellence of Stoicism appears. There it
shines resplendent, and furnishes a theme on
which its sages loved to dwell. Never have
• Cf. Goethe, Iphigenie auf Tauris, Act II., Sc. ».
,,Lust und Liebe sind die Fittige
Zu grossen Thaten."
" Pleasure and love are the pinions
To noble deeds."
Seneca and Kant. loi
the adherents of any system of philosophy
exhibited greater fortitude amid all sorts of
sufferings, national, individual, and domestic,
or shown more complete self-control in the
midst of luxurious folly, mad ambition, and
ungovernable avarice. This it is that has
made the very name of Stoicism a synonym
for unflinching, uncomplaining endurance.
Some have criticised their doctrine of sui-
cide ; and, viewed in one aspect, it is a con-
fession of the failure of their system. The
system assumes a perfectibility of character,
and an order of nature perfectly adapted to
secure this perfection ; a perfect mastery of
all circumstances, and a perfect tranquillity
resulting from this mastery. To admit the
necessity of suicide, therefore, is apparently
to deny one or other of their fundamental
principles. But we must remember that, with
the Stoic, life was not a sacred thing. It fell
into the common class of indifferentiay and
the taking of it, therefore, entailed no crime.
On the contrary, that act might be a virtue.
With this view, therefore, the Stoic preserved
his mastery over circumstances, and maintain-
I02 Seneca and Kant.
ed his tranquillity of mind by suicide. To
have remained in life would have required
him to forfeit these. Sad picture, alas ! even
though consistent, of the weakness of their
system.
We have seen that Stoicism is a system
of fatalism ; as identifying the Deity with the
universe, which in definite periods is absorbed
into his essence, it is a form of pantheism ; in
asserting the underived existence of matter,
it exhibits one of the numerous types of ma-
terialism ; and in referring all doctrines tO'
reason as the ultimate standard, it is a sys-
tem of rationalism. It has also been called
the nearest approach which the pagan mind
has made to Christianity. We grant that
they have much in common. But a system
that allows no forgiveness of enemies ; that
forbids repentance for wrong ; that recognizes,
no need of redemption, or divine aid in trial
•
that never rises to the conception of trust in
God, or communion with him, much less of
rejoicing in tribulation because endured in his
service ; that seeks in suicide a cowardly re-
ief from the ills of life, which, in their bitterest
Seneca una jxunt. 163
form,Christian faith has ofttimes enabled the
sufferer heroically and even cheerfully to en-
dure ; that is in its inmost essence a system
of selfishness ; is yet far below the benevo-
lence, the mercy, the loving trust, and com-
forting hope of the Gospel. Yet it must be
confessed that much that is called Christianity
would be greatly improved, if it had the firm
conviction, the fortitude, the patience, the
persistence of Stoicism.
We will c®nclude with the fitting words of
Sir Alexander Grant
:
" The spirit of Stoicism, existing by itself,
is narrow and harsh ; it has too great affinity
to pride and egotism ; it is too repressive of
the spontaneous fe'=;linj(s of art, and poetry,
and geniality of lif( On the other hand, it
is the stimulus to live above the world.
Hence while the bare Stoical spirit, in what-
ever form, produces only an imperfect and
repulsive character, a certain leaven of it, to
say the least, is necessary, else would a man
be wanting in all effort and aspiration of
mind." *
^Quoted in Hurst & Whiting's Seneca.
INDEX.
INDEX.
PACB.
Abbott, his Kant's Ethics, cited •••••••• 53-64,^assUn^
Alexander the Great, ••••••.•••••, ,.15
Antisthenes, , , ••• la
Aristippus, ••.,,,» la
Aristotle ", 14, 17
Bowen, Prof. Francis, his Modern Philosophy referred to 78
Chrysippus , 30, 27
Cicero, '. 21, 31, 44 ; 41, 86
Cleanthes, 20
Hymn of 31
Coleridge, his Principles of Political Knowledge, 90, Note.
Cousin, his Lectures on the True, the Beautiful, and the Good, cited, . , 83
Demetrius, on Misfortune, -tp
De Vita Beata, De Brevitate Vitse, De Providentia, De Tranquillitate
Animi, and Epistles of Seneca, cited, 28-44
Emerson, R. W., his Conduct of Life, referred to • .... 7a
Epictetus, 21
Epicurus, , x8
Goethe, quoted, , 100
Grant, Sir Alex., quoted ^ . 103
Greece, Condition of, at Rise of Stoicism , 15
Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Si^tten of Kant, cited, , , e^.-^^passim.
Haven, Prof. Joseph, his History of Philosophy, quoted, ... r ..... 97
Heraclitus, 11
Hickok, Dr. L. P., his Moral Science and Rational Psychology, cited,
64, Note ; ^^y Note.
Hurst & Whiting's Seneca, , z%-^\fpassim*
Kant, his life and character, 49, 95 ; on happiness and agood will, 52 ; on
duty, the moral law, and reverence, 25, 54, 57; on categorical and
hypothetical imperatives, 55 ; on holiness and happiness, 56-64*
lOS INDEX.
PAGS*
en legality and morality, 58; on theories of virtue, 60; gives fun-
damental formula of morals, 62; on autonomy and heteronomy,
63; on freedom and necessity, 64; on ethical ends, 68; his post-
ulates, 70 ; his views on religion, 71 ; his agreement and disa-
greement with Stoicism, 77; excellences of his ethical system,
81-83 ; defects of it, 83-95 ; his system compared with Christian-
ity, 88, 90, gi, 94, 96; his inner experience, 95; recapitulation of
his doctrine, 73, See, also, Stoicism,
Marcus Aurelius, • •
Martensen, his Christian Ethics, cited, 9®
Nero, his relations to Seneca, ..««
Origen, his theory of revelation, • 7*
Panaetius, introduces Stoicism into Rome, , . ..••••• so
Philip of Macedon, ••.•••••••-•••• S8
Philosophy,becomes subjective, 17; influence of times on, 13; favored
by decline of religion in Greece, x6
Plato, IX, la, 17, 26
Potter, Geschichte der Philosophie, cited, • ^7, 66
Porter, Pres. N., his Human Intellect 65, Note.
Pyrrho, school of •19
Riickert, his Die sterbende Blume, quoted, ••• 99
Schiller, cited, . . . 99
Schleiermacher, basis of his ethical system .• •94
Schwegler, his History of Philosophy, S^f 7*9 9^
Semple, J. W., his translation of Kant's Metaphysics ofEthics, 53, 57, 59, 6S
Seneca, his life, 31 ; cited 28-44,^foi-xcM.
Smith, Dr. Wm., quoted, xa
Socrates, disciples and successors of, xs, x6, x8
Sophists, the x8
Stoicism, rise of, ii-zx; its connection with Cynicism, XI-X3; with
Socrates, x8; general character of, 25; its doctrine of physics,
25 ; its fundamental ethical principles, 26 ; its different defini-
tions of virtue, 27, 40; its fatalism, 28; makes Deity subject to
law, 39; teaches submission to fate, 29'; its paradoxes, 34, 36,37;
its inherent dii&culties, 34 ; its definition of the good, 35 ; makes
life a discipline, 35 ; its view of fortune, 36, 38, 43 ; of passion, 39,
I
41 ; of suicide, 43, xox, 102 ; its definitions of pleasure, virtue, I
and happiness, 31 ; spirit of its disciples, 37-40, loo; its views of
wealth, public life, etc., 42 ; its excellences, 100 ; its defects,
98-xoo, Z03; its connection with other systems, xoa; compared
with Christianity, xoa ; recapitulation of doctrine, 44. See, also,
Kant.
INDEX, 109
PAGE.
Ueberweg, his History of Philosophy, . , . 19, 20, 35, 8a
TOn Kirchmann, J. H., his edition of Kant, cited, 52-69* passim,
Wuttke, his Christian Ethics/ •..83
Zeller, his Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics, cited, . « X7, so, 31, 40
Zeno of Cittium, 15, X9, 37; founds a Stoic school at Athens, • • 29
. .'. -•'^^^3;'--dg;«
' ".-•'. f
'.;.i ...l-:".;{i:;a
